Chapter VIII: State Of Persia And Restoration Of The
      Monarchy.—Part I.

     Of The State Of Persia After The Restoration Of The Monarchy By
     Artaxerxes.

      Whenever Tacitus indulges himself in those beautiful episodes, in
      which he relates some domestic transaction of the Germans or of
      the Parthians, his principal object is to relieve the attention
      of the reader from a uniform scene of vice and misery. From the
      reign of Augustus to the time of Alexander Severus, the enemies
      of Rome were in her bosom—the tyrants and the soldiers; and her
      prosperity had a very distant and feeble interest in the
      revolutions that might happen beyond the Rhine and the Euphrates.
      But when the military order had levelled, in wild anarchy, the
      power of the prince, the laws of the senate, and even the
      discipline of the camp, the barbarians of the North and of the
      East, who had long hovered on the frontier, boldly attacked the
      provinces of a declining monarchy. Their vexatious inroads were
      changed into formidable irruptions, and, after a long vicissitude
      of mutual calamities, many tribes of the victorious invaders
      established themselves in the provinces of the Roman Empire. To
      obtain a clearer knowledge of these great events, we shall
      endeavor to form a previous idea of the character, forces, and
      designs of those nations who avenged the cause of Hannibal and
      Mithridates.

      In the more early ages of the world, whilst the forest that
      covered Europe afforded a retreat to a few wandering savages, the
      inhabitants of Asia were already collected into populous cities,
      and reduced under extensive empires the seat of the arts, of
      luxury, and of despotism. The Assyrians reigned over the East, 1
      till the sceptre of Ninus and Semiramis dropped from the hands of
      their enervated successors. The Medes and the Babylonians divided
      their power, and were themselves swallowed up in the monarchy of
      the Persians, whose arms could not be confined within the narrow
      limits of Asia. Followed, as it is said, by two millions of
      _men_, Xerxes, the descendant of Cyrus, invaded Greece.

      Thirty thousand _soldiers_, under the command of Alexander, the
      son of Philip, who was intrusted by the Greeks with their glory
      and revenge, were sufficient to subdue Persia. The princes of the
      house of Seleucus usurped and lost the Macedonian command over
      the East. About the same time, that, by an ignominious treaty,
      they resigned to the Romans the country on this side Mount Tarus,
      they were driven by the Parthians, 1001 an obscure horde of
      Scythian origin, from all the provinces of Upper Asia. The
      formidable power of the Parthians, which spread from India to the
      frontiers of Syria, was in its turn subverted by Ardshir, or
      Artaxerxes; the founder of a new dynasty, which, under the name
      of Sassanides, governed Persia till the invasion of the Arabs.
      This great revolution, whose fatal influence was soon experienced
      by the Romans, happened in the fourth year of Alexander Severus,
      two hundred and twenty-six years after the Christian era. 2 201

      1 (return) [ An ancient chronologist, quoted by Valleius
      Paterculus, (l. i. c. 6,) observes, that the Assyrians, the
      Medes, the Persians, and the Macedonians, reigned over Asia one
      thousand nine hundred and ninety-five years, from the accession
      of Ninus to the defeat of Antiochus by the Romans. As the latter
      of these great events happened 289 years before Christ, the
      former may be placed 2184 years before the same æra. The
      Astronomical Observations, found at Babylon, by Alexander, went
      fifty years higher.]

      1001 (return) [ The Parthians were a tribe of the Indo-Germanic
      branch which dwelt on the south-east of the Caspian, and belonged
      to the same race as the Getæ, the Massagetæ, and other nations,
      confounded by the ancients under the vague denomination of
      Scythians. Klaproth, Tableaux Hist. d l’Asie, p. 40. Strabo (p.
      747) calls the Parthians Carduchi, i.e., the inhabitants of
      Curdistan.—M.]

      2 (return) [ In the five hundred and thirty-eighth year of the
      æra of Seleucus. See Agathias, l. ii. p. 63. This great event
      (such is the carelessness of the Orientals) is placed by
      Eutychius as high as the tenth year of Commodus, and by Moses of
      Chorene as low as the reign of Philip. Ammianus Marcellinus has
      so servilely copied (xxiii. 6) his ancient materials, which are
      indeed very good, that he describes the family of the Arsacides
      as still seated on the Persian throne in the middle of the fourth
      century.]

      201 (return) [ The Persian History, if the poetry of the Shah
      Nameh, the Book of Kings, may deserve that name mentions four
      dynasties from the earliest ages to the invasion of the Saracens.
      The Shah Nameh was composed with the view of perpetuating the
      remains of the original Persian records or traditions which had
      survived the Saracenic invasion. The task was undertaken by the
      poet Dukiki, and afterwards, under the patronage of Mahmood of
      Ghazni, completed by Ferdusi. The first of these dynasties is
      that of Kaiomors, as Sir W. Jones observes, the dark and fabulous
      period; the second, that of the Kaianian, the heroic and
      poetical, in which the earned have discovered some curious, and
      imagined some fanciful, analogies with the Jewish, the Greek, and
      the Roman accounts of the eastern world. See, on the Shah Nameh,
      Translation by Goerres, with Von Hammer’s Review, Vienna Jahrbuch
      von Lit. 17, 75, 77. Malcolm’s Persia, 8vo. ed. i. 503. Macan’s
      Preface to his Critical Edition of the Shah Nameh. On the early
      Persian History, a very sensible abstract of various opinions in
      Malcolm’s Hist. of Persian.—M.]

      Artaxerxes had served with great reputation in the armies of
      Artaban, the last king of the Parthians, and it appears that he
      was driven into exile and rebellion by royal ingratitude, the
      customary reward for superior merit. His birth was obscure, and
      the obscurity equally gave room to the aspersions of his enemies,
      and the flattery of his adherents. If we credit the scandal of
      the former, Artaxerxes sprang from the illegitimate commerce of a
      tanner’s wife with a common soldier. 3 The latter represent him
      as descended from a branch of the ancient kings of Persian,
      though time and misfortune had gradually reduced his ancestors to
      the humble station of private citizens. 4 As the lineal heir of
      the monarchy, he asserted his right to the throne, and challenged
      the noble task of delivering the Persians from the oppression
      under which they groaned above five centuries since the death of
      Darius. The Parthians were defeated in three great battles. 401
      In the last of these their king Artaban was slain, and the spirit
      of the nation was forever broken. 5 The authority of Artaxerxes
      was solemnly acknowledged in a great assembly held at Balch in
      Khorasan. 501 Two younger branches of the royal house of Arsaces
      were confounded among the prostrate satraps. A third, more
      mindful of ancient grandeur than of present necessity, attempted
      to retire, with a numerous train of vessels, towards their
      kinsman, the king of Armenia; but this little army of deserters
      was intercepted, and cut off, by the vigilance of the conqueror,
      6 who boldly assumed the double diadem, and the title of King of
      Kings, which had been enjoyed by his predecessor. But these
      pompous titles, instead of gratifying the vanity of the Persian,
      served only to admonish him of his duty, and to inflame in his
      soul the ambition of restoring in their full splendor, the
      religion and empire of Cyrus.

      3 (return) [ The tanner’s name was Babec; the soldier’s, Sassan:
      from the former Artaxerxes obtained the surname of Babegan, from
      the latter all his descendants have been styled Sassanides.]

      4 (return) [ D’Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientale, Ardshir.]

      401 (return) [ In the plain of Hoormuz, the son of Babek was
      hailed in the field with the proud title of Shahan Shah, king of
      kings—a name ever since assumed by the sovereigns of Persia.
      Malcolm, i. 71.—M.]

      5 (return) [ Dion Cassius, l. lxxx. Herodian, l. vi. p. 207.
      Abulpharagins Dynast. p. 80.]

      501 (return) [ See the Persian account of the rise of Ardeschir
      Babegan in Malcolm l 69.—M.]

      6 (return) [ See Moses Chorenensis, l. ii. c. 65—71.]

      I. During the long servitude of Persia under the Macedonian and
      the Parthian yoke, the nations of Europe and Asia had mutually
      adopted and corrupted each other’s superstitions. The Arsacides,
      indeed, practised the worship of the Magi; but they disgraced and
      polluted it with a various mixture of foreign idolatry. 601 The
      memory of Zoroaster, the ancient prophet and philosopher of the
      Persians, 7 was still revered in the East; but the obsolete and
      mysterious language, in which the Zendavesta was composed, 8
      opened a field of dispute to seventy sects, who variously
      explained the fundamental doctrines of their religion, and were
      all indifferently devided by a crowd of infidels, who rejected
      the divine mission and miracles of the prophet. To suppress the
      idolaters, reunite the schismatics, and confute the unbelievers,
      by the infallible decision of a general council, the pious
      Artaxerxes summoned the Magi from all parts of his dominions.
      These priests, who had so long sighed in contempt and obscurity
      obeyed the welcome summons; and, on the appointed day, appeared,
      to the number of about eighty thousand. But as the debates of so
      tumultuous an assembly could not have been directed by the
      authority of reason, or influenced by the art of policy, the
      Persian synod was reduced, by successive operations, to forty
      thousand, to four thousand, to four hundred, to forty, and at
      last to seven Magi, the most respected for their learning and
      piety. One of these, Erdaviraph, a young but holy prelate,
      received from the hands of his brethren three cups of
      soporiferous wine. He drank them off, and instantly fell into a
      long and profound sleep. As soon as he waked, he related to the
      king and to the believing multitude, his journey to heaven, and
      his intimate conferences with the Deity. Every doubt was silenced
      by this supernatural evidence; and the articles of the faith of
      Zoroaster were fixed with equal authority and precision. 9 A
      short delineation of that celebrated system will be found useful,
      not only to display the character of the Persian nation, but to
      illustrate many of their most important transactions, both in
      peace and war, with the Roman empire. 10

      601 (return) [ Silvestre de Sacy (Antiquites de la Perse) had
      proved the neglect of the Zoroastrian religion under the Parthian
      kings.—M.]

      7 (return) [ Hyde and Prideaux, working up the Persian legends
      and their own conjectures into a very agreeable story, represent
      Zoroaster as a contemporary of Darius Hystaspes. But it is
      sufficient to observe, that the Greek writers, who lived almost
      in the age of Darius, agree in placing the æra of Zoroaster many
      hundred, or even thousand, years before their own time. The
      judicious criticisms of Mr. Moyle perceived, and maintained
      against his uncle, Dr. Prideaux, the antiquity of the Persian
      prophet. See his work, vol. ii. * Note: There are three leading
      theories concerning the age of Zoroaster: 1. That which assigns
      him to an age of great and almost indefinite antiquity—it is that
      of Moyle, adopted by Gibbon, Volney, Recherches sur l’Histoire,
      ii. 2. Rhode, also, (die Heilige Sage, &c.,) in a very ingenious
      and ably-developed theory, throws the Bactrian prophet far back
      into antiquity 2. Foucher, (Mem. de l’Acad. xxvii. 253,) Tychsen,
      (in Com. Soc. Gott. ii. 112), Heeren, (ldeen. i. 459,) and
      recently Holty, identify the Gushtasp of the Persian mythological
      history with Cyaxares the First, the king of the Medes, and
      consider the religion to be Median in its origin. M. Guizot
      considers this opinion most probable, note in loc. 3. Hyde,
      Prideaux, Anquetil du Perron, Kleuker, Herder, Goerres,
      (Mythen-Geschichte,) Von Hammer. (Wien. Jahrbuch, vol. ix.,)
      Malcolm, (i. 528,) De Guigniaut, (Relig. de l’Antiq. 2d part,
      vol. iii.,) Klaproth, (Tableaux de l’Asie, p. 21,) make Gushtasp
      Darius Hystaspes, and Zoroaster his contemporary. The silence of
      Herodotus appears the great objection to this theory. Some
      writers, as M. Foucher (resting, as M. Guizot observes, on the
      doubtful authority of Pliny,) make more than one Zoroaster, and
      so attempt to reconcile the conflicting theories.— M.]

      8 (return) [ That ancient idiom was called the Zend. The language
      of the commentary, the Pehlvi, though much more modern, has
      ceased many ages ago to be a living tongue. This fact alone (if
      it is allowed as authentic) sufficiently warrants the antiquity
      of those writings which M d’Anquetil has brought into Europe, and
      translated into French. * Note: Zend signifies life, living. The
      word means, either the collection of the canonical books of the
      followers of Zoroaster, or the language itself in which they are
      written. They are the books that contain the word of life whether
      the language was originally called Zend, or whether it was so
      called from the contents of the books. Avesta means word, oracle,
      revelation: this term is not the title of a particular work, but
      of the collection of the books of Zoroaster, as the revelation of
      Ormuzd. This collection is sometimes called Zendavesta, sometimes
      briefly Zend. The Zend was the ancient language of Media, as is
      proved by its affinity with the dialects of Armenia and Georgia;
      it was already a dead language under the Arsacides in the country
      which was the scene of the events recorded in the Zendavesta.
      Some critics, among others Richardson and Sir W. Jones, have
      called in question the antiquity of these books. The former
      pretended that Zend had never been a written or spoken language,
      but had been invented in the later times by the Magi, for the
      purposes of their art; but Kleuker, in the dissertations which he
      added to those of Anquetil and the Abbé Foucher, has proved that
      the Zend was a living and spoken language.—G. Sir W. Jones
      appears to have abandoned his doubts, on discovering the affinity
      between the Zend and the Sanskrit. Since the time of Kleuker,
      this question has been investigated by many learned scholars. Sir
      W. Jones, Leyden, (Asiat. Research. x. 283,) and Mr. Erskine,
      (Bombay Trans. ii. 299,) consider it a derivative from the
      Sanskrit. The antiquity of the Zendavesta has likewise been
      asserted by Rask, the great Danish linguist, who, according to
      Malcolm, brought back from the East fresh transcripts and
      additions to those published by Anquetil. According to Rask, the
      Zend and Sanskrit are sister dialects; the one the parent of the
      Persian, the other of the Indian family of languages.—G. and
      M.——But the subject is more satisfactorily illustrated in Bopp’s
      comparative Grammar of the Sanscrit, Zend, Greek, Latin,
      Lithuanian, Gothic, and German languages. Berlin. 1833-5.
      According to Bopp, the Zend is, in some respects, of a more
      remarkable structure than the Sanskrit. Parts of the Zendavesta
      have been published in the original, by M. Bournouf, at Paris,
      and M. Ol. shausen, in Hamburg.—M.——The Pehlvi was the language
      of the countries bordering on Assyria, and probably of Assyria
      itself. Pehlvi signifies valor, heroism; the Pehlvi, therefore,
      was the language of the ancient heroes and kings of Persia, the
      valiant. (Mr. Erskine prefers the derivation from Pehla, a
      border.—M.) It contains a number of Aramaic roots. Anquetil
      considered it formed from the Zend. Kleuker does not adopt this
      opinion. The Pehlvi, he says, is much more flowing, and less
      overcharged with vowels, than the Zend. The books of Zoroaster,
      first written in Zend, were afterwards translated into Pehlvi and
      Parsi. The Pehlvi had fallen into disuse under the dynasty of the
      Sassanides, but the learned still wrote it. The Parsi, the
      dialect of Pars or Farristan, was then prevailing dialect.
      Kleuker, Anhang zum Zend Avesta, 2, ii. part i. p. 158, part ii.
      31.—G.——Mr. Erskine (Bombay Transactions) considers the existing
      Zendavesta to have been compiled in the time of Ardeschir
      Babegan.—M.]

      9 (return) [ Hyde de Religione veterum Pers. c. 21.]

      10 (return) [ I have principally drawn this account from the
      Zendavesta of M. d’Anquetil, and the Sadder, subjoined to Dr.
      Hyde’s treatise. It must, however, be confessed, that the studied
      obscurity of a prophet, the figurative style of the East, and the
      deceitful medium of a French or Latin version may have betrayed
      us into error and heresy, in this abridgment of Persian theology.
      * Note: It is to be regretted that Gibbon followed the
      post-Mahometan Sadder of Hyde.—M.]

      The great and fundamental article of the system was the
      celebrated doctrine of the two principles; a bold and injudicious
      attempt of Eastern philosophy to reconcile the existence of moral
      and physical evil with the attributes of a beneficent Creator and
      Governor of the world. The first and original Being, in whom, or
      by whom, the universe exists, is denominated in the writings of
      Zoroaster, _Time without bounds_; 1001a but it must be confessed,
      that this infinite substance seems rather a metaphysical
      abstraction of the mind than a real object endowed with
      self-consciousness, or possessed of moral perfections. From
      either the blind or the intelligent operation of this infinite
      Time, which bears but too near an affinity with the chaos of the
      Greeks, the two secondary but active principles of the universe
      were from all eternity produced, Ormusd and Ahriman, each of them
      possessed of the powers of creation, but each disposed, by his
      invariable nature, to exercise them with different designs. 1002
      The principle of good is eternally aborbed in light; the
      principle of evil eternally buried in darkness. The wise
      benevolence of Ormusd formed man capable of virtue, and
      abundantly provided his fair habitation with the materials of
      happiness. By his vigilant providence, the motion of the planets,
      the order of the seasons, and the temperate mixture of the
      elements, are preserved. But the malice of Ahriman has long since
      pierced _Ormusd’s egg;_ or, in other words, has violated the
      harmony of his works. Since that fatal eruption, the most minute
      articles of good and evil are intimately intermingled and
      agitated together; the rankest poisons spring up amidst the most
      salutary plants; deluges, earthquakes, and conflagrations attest
      the conflict of Nature, and the little world of man is
      perpetually shaken by vice and misfortune. Whilst the rest of
      human kind are led away captives in the chains of their infernal
      enemy, the faithful Persian alone reserves his religious
      adoration for his friend and protector Ormusd, and fights under
      his banner of light, in the full confidence that he shall, in the
      last day, share the glory of his triumph. At that decisive
      period, the enlightened wisdom of goodness will render the power
      of Ormusd superior to the furious malice of his rival. Ahriman
      and his followers, disarmed and subdued, will sink into their
      native darkness; and virtue will maintain the eternal peace and
      harmony of the universe. 11 1101

      1001a (return) [ Zeruane Akerene, so translated by Anquetil and
      Kleuker. There is a dissertation of Foucher on this subject, Mem.
      de l’Acad. des Inscr. t. xxix. According to Bohlen (das alte
      Indien) it is the Sanskrit Sarvan Akaranam, the Uncreated Whole;
      or, according to Fred. Schlegel, Sarvan Akharyam the Uncreate
      Indivisible.—M.]

      1002 (return) [ This is an error. Ahriman was not forced by his
      invariable nature to do evil; the Zendavesta expressly recognizes
      (see the Izeschne) that he was born good, that in his origin he
      was light; envy rendered him evil; he became jealous of the power
      and attributes of Ormuzd; then light was changed into darkness,
      and Ahriman was precipitated into the abyss. See the Abridgment
      of the Doctrine of the Ancient Persians, by Anquetil, c. ii
      Section 2.—G.]

      11 (return) [ The modern Parsees (and in some degree the Sadder)
      exalt Ormusd into the first and omnipotent cause, whilst they
      degrade Ahriman into an inferior but rebellious spirit. Their
      desire of pleasing the Mahometans may have contributed to refine
      their theological systems.]

      1101 (return) [ According to the Zendavesta, Ahriman will not be
      annihilated or precipitated forever into darkness: at the
      resurrection of the dead he will be entirely defeated by Ormuzd,
      his power will be destroyed, his kingdom overthrown to its
      foundations, he will himself be purified in torrents of melting
      metal; he will change his heart and his will, become holy,
      heavenly establish in his dominions the law and word of Ormuzd,
      unite himself with him in everlasting friendship, and both will
      sing hymns in honor of the Great Eternal. See Anquetil’s
      Abridgment. Kleuker, Anhang part iii. p 85, 36; and the Izeschne,
      one of the books of the Zendavesta. According to the Sadder
      Bun-Dehesch, a more modern work, Ahriman is to be annihilated:
      but this is contrary to the text itself of the Zendavesta, and to
      the idea its author gives of the kingdom of Eternity, after the
      twelve thousand years assigned to the contest between Good and
      Evil.—G.]




      Chapter VIII: State Of Persia And Restoration Of The
      Monarchy.—Part II.

      The theology of Zoroaster was darkly comprehended by foreigners,
      and even by the far greater number of his disciples; but the most
      careless observers were struck with the philosophic simplicity of
      the Persian worship. “That people,” said Herodotus, 12 “rejects
      the use of temples, of altars, and of statues, and smiles at the
      folly of those nations who imagine that the gods are sprung from,
      or bear any affinity with, the human nature. The tops of the
      highest mountains are the places chosen for sacrifices. Hymns and
      prayers are the principal worship; the Supreme God, who fills the
      wide circle of heaven, is the object to whom they are addressed.”
      Yet, at the same time, in the true spirit of a polytheist, he
      accuseth them of adoring Earth, Water, Fire, the Winds, and the
      Sun and Moon. But the Persians of every age have denied the
      charge, and explained the equivocal conduct, which might appear
      to give a color to it. The elements, and more particularly Fire,
      Light, and the Sun, whom they called Mithra, 1201 were the
      objects of their religious reverence because they considered them
      as the purest symbols, the noblest productions, and the most
      powerful agents of the Divine Power and Nature. 13

      12 (return) [ Herodotus, l. i. c. 131. But Dr. Prideaux thinks,
      with reason, that the use of temples was afterwards permitted in
      the Magian religion. Note: The Pyræa, or fire temples of the
      Zoroastrians, (observes Kleuker, Persica, p. 16,) were only to be
      found in Media or Aderbidjan, provinces into which Herodotus did
      not penetrate.—M.]

      1201 (return) [ Among the Persians Mithra is not the Sun:
      Anquetil has contested and triumphantly refuted the opinion of
      those who confound them, and it is evidently contrary to the text
      of the Zendavesta. Mithra is the first of the genii, or jzeds,
      created by Ormuzd; it is he who watches over all nature. Hence
      arose the misapprehension of some of the Greeks, who have said
      that Mithra was the summus deus of the Persians: he has a
      thousand ears and ten thousand eyes. The Chaldeans appear to have
      assigned him a higher rank than the Persians. It is he who
      bestows upon the earth the light of the sun. The sun. named Khor,
      (brightness,) is thus an inferior genius, who, with many other
      genii, bears a part in the functions of Mithra. These assistant
      genii to another genius are called his kamkars; but in the
      Zendavesta they are never confounded. On the days sacred to a
      particular genius, the Persian ought to recite, not only the
      prayers addressed to him, but those also which are addressed to
      his kamkars; thus the hymn or iescht of Mithra is recited on the
      day of the sun, (Khor,) and vice versa. It is probably this which
      has sometimes caused them to be confounded; but Anquetil had
      himself exposed this error, which Kleuker, and all who have
      studied the Zendavesta, have noticed. See viii. Diss. of
      Anquetil. Kleuker’s Anhang, part iii. p. 132.—G. M. Guizot is
      unquestionably right, according to the pure and original doctrine
      of the Zend. The Mithriac worship, which was so extensively
      propagated in the West, and in which Mithra and the sun were
      perpetually confounded, seems to have been formed from a fusion
      of Zoroastrianism and Chaldaism, or the Syrian worship of the
      sun. An excellent abstract of the question, with references to
      the works of the chief modern writers on his curious subject, De
      Sacy, Kleuker, Von Hammer, &c., may be found in De Guigniaut’s
      translation of Kreuzer. Relig. d’Antiquite, notes viii. ix. to
      book ii. vol. i. 2d part, page 728.—M.]

      13 (return) [ Hyde de Relig. Pers. c. 8. Notwithstanding all
      their distinctions and protestations, which seem sincere enough,
      their tyrants, the Mahometans, have constantly stigmatized them
      as idolatrous worshippers of the fire.]

      Every mode of religion, to make a deep and lasting impression on
      the human mind, must exercise our obedience, by enjoining
      practices of devotion, for which we can assign no reason; and
      must acquire our esteem, by inculcating moral duties analogous to
      the dictates of our own hearts. The religion of Zoroaster was
      abundantly provided with the former and possessed a sufficient
      portion of the latter. At the age of puberty, the faithful
      Persian was invested with a mysterious girdle, the badge of the
      divine protection; and from that moment all the actions of his
      life, even the most indifferent, or the most necessary, were
      sanctified by their peculiar prayers, ejaculations, or
      genuflections; the omission of which, under any circumstances,
      was a grievous sin, not inferior in guilt to the violation of the
      moral duties. The moral duties, however, of justice, mercy,
      liberality, &c., were in their turn required of the disciple of
      Zoroaster, who wished to escape the persecution of Ahriman, and
      to live with Ormusd in a blissful eternity, where the degree of
      felicity will be exactly proportioned to the degree of virtue and
      piety. 14

      14 (return) [ See the Sadder, the smallest part of which consists
      of moral precepts. The ceremonies enjoined are infinite and
      trifling. Fifteen genuflections, prayers, &c., were required
      whenever the devout Persian cut his nails or made water; or as
      often as he put on the sacred girdle Sadder, Art. 14, 50, 60. *
      Note: Zoroaster exacted much less ceremonial observance, than at
      a later period, the priests of his doctrines. This is the
      progress of all religions the worship, simple in its origin, is
      gradually overloaded with minute superstitions. The maxim of the
      Zendavesta, on the relative merit of sowing the earth and of
      prayers, quoted below by Gibbon, proves that Zoroaster did not
      attach too much importance to these observances. Thus it is not
      from the Zendavesta that Gibbon derives the proof of his
      allegation, but from the Sadder, a much later work.—G]

      But there are some remarkable instances in which Zoroaster lays
      aside the prophet, assumes the legislator, and discovers a
      liberal concern for private and public happiness, seldom to be
      found among the grovelling or visionary schemes of superstition.
      Fasting and celibacy, the common means of purchasing the divine
      favor, he condemns with abhorrence as a criminal rejection of the
      best gifts of Providence. The saint, in the Magian religion, is
      obliged to beget children, to plant useful trees, to destroy
      noxious animals, to convey water to the dry lands of Persia, and
      to work out his salvation by pursuing all the labors of
      agriculture. 1401 We may quote from the Zendavesta a wise and
      benevolent maxim, which compensates for many an absurdity. “He
      who sows the ground with care and diligence acquires a greater
      stock of religious merit than he could gain by the repetition of
      ten thousand prayers.” 15 In the spring of every year a festival
      was celebrated, destined to represent the primitive equality, and
      the present connection, of mankind. The stately kings of Persia,
      exchanging their vain pomp for more genuine greatness, freely
      mingled with the humblest but most useful of their subjects. On
      that day the husbandmen were admitted, without distinction, to
      the table of the king and his satraps. The monarch accepted their
      petitions, inquired into their grievances, and conversed with
      them on the most equal terms. “From your labors,” was he
      accustomed to say, (and to say with truth, if not with
      sincerity,) “from your labors we receive our subsistence; you
      derive your tranquillity from our vigilance: since, therefore, we
      are mutually necessary to each other, let us live together like
      brothers in concord and love.” 16 Such a festival must indeed
      have degenerated, in a wealthy and despotic empire, into a
      theatrical representation; but it was at least a comedy well
      worthy of a royal audience, and which might sometimes imprint a
      salutary lesson on the mind of a young prince.

      1401 (return) [ See, on Zoroaster’s encouragement of agriculture,
      the ingenious remarks of Heeren, Ideen, vol. i. p. 449, &c., and
      Rhode, Heilige Sage, p. 517—M.]

      15 (return) [ Zendavesta, tom. i. p. 224, and Precis du Systeme
      de Zoroastre, tom. iii.]

      16 (return) [ Hyde de Religione Persarum, c. 19.]

      Had Zoroaster, in all his institutions, invariably supported this
      exalted character, his name would deserve a place with those of
      Numa and Confucius, and his system would be justly entitled to
      all the applause, which it has pleased some of our divines, and
      even some of our philosophers, to bestow on it. But in that
      motley composition, dictated by reason and passion, by enthusiasm
      and by selfish motives, some useful and sublime truths were
      disgraced by a mixture of the most abject and dangerous
      superstition. The Magi, or sacerdotal order, were extremely
      numerous, since, as we have already seen, fourscore thousand of
      them were convened in a general council. Their forces were
      multiplied by discipline. A regular hierarchy was diffused
      through all the provinces of Persia; and the Archimagus, who
      resided at Balch, was respected as the visible head of the
      church, and the lawful successor of Zoroaster. 17 The property of
      the Magi was very considerable. Besides the less invidious
      possession of a large tract of the most fertile lands of Media,
      18 they levied a general tax on the fortunes and the industry of
      the Persians. 19 “Though your good works,” says the interested
      prophet, “exceed in number the leaves of the trees, the drops of
      rain, the stars in the heaven, or the sands on the sea-shore,
      they will all be unprofitable to you, unless they are accepted by
      the _destour_, or priest. To obtain the acceptation of this guide
      to salvation, you must faithfully pay him _tithes_ of all you
      possess, of your goods, of your lands, and of your money. If the
      destour be satisfied, your soul will escape hell tortures; you
      will secure praise in this world and happiness in the next. For
      the destours are the teachers of religion; they know all things,
      and they deliver all men.” 20 201a

      17 (return) [ Hyde de Religione Persarum, c. 28. Both Hyde and
      Prideaux affect to apply to the Magian the terms consecrated to
      the Christian hierarchy.]

      18 (return) [ Ammian. Marcellin. xxiii. 6. He informs us (as far
      as we may credit him) of two curious particulars: 1. That the
      Magi derived some of their most secret doctrines from the Indian
      Brachmans; and 2. That they were a tribe, or family, as well as
      order.]

      19 (return) [ The divine institution of tithes exhibits a
      singular instance of conformity between the law of Zoroaster and
      that of Moses. Those who cannot otherwise account for it, may
      suppose, if they please that the Magi of the latter times
      inserted so useful an interpolation into the writings of their
      prophet.]

      20 (return) [ Sadder, Art. viii.]

      201a (return) [ The passage quoted by Gibbon is not taken from
      the writings of Zoroaster, but from the Sadder, a work, as has
      been before said, much later than the books which form the
      Zendavesta. and written by a Magus for popular use; what it
      contains, therefore, cannot be attributed to Zoroaster. It is
      remarkable that Gibbon should fall into this error, for Hyde
      himself does not ascribe the Sadder to Zoroaster; he remarks that
      it is written inverse, while Zoroaster always wrote in prose.
      Hyde, i. p. 27. Whatever may be the case as to the latter
      assertion, for which there appears little foundation, it is
      unquestionable that the Sadder is of much later date. The Abbé
      Foucher does not even believe it to be an extract from the works
      of Zoroaster. See his Diss. before quoted. Mem. de l’Acad. des
      Ins. t. xxvii.—G. Perhaps it is rash to speak of any part of the
      Zendavesta as the writing of Zoroaster, though it may be a
      genuine representation of his. As to the Sadder, Hyde (in Præf.)
      considered it not above 200 years old. It is manifestly
      post-Mahometan. See Art. xxv. on fasting.—M.]

      These convenient maxims of reverence and implicit faith were
      doubtless imprinted with care on the tender minds of youth; since
      the Magi were the masters of education in Persia, and to their
      hands the children even of the royal family were intrusted. 21
      The Persian priests, who were of a speculative genius, preserved
      and investigated the secrets of Oriental philosophy; and
      acquired, either by superior knowledge, or superior art, the
      reputation of being well versed in some occult sciences, which
      have derived their appellation from the Magi. 22 Those of more
      active dispositions mixed with the world in courts and cities;
      and it is observed, that the administration of Artaxerxes was in
      a great measure directed by the counsels of the sacerdotal order,
      whose dignity, either from policy or devotion, that prince
      restored to its ancient splendor. 23

      21 (return) [ Plato in Alcibiad.]

      22 (return) [ Pliny (Hist. Natur. l. xxx. c. 1) observes, that
      magic held mankind by the triple chain of religion, of physic,
      and of astronomy.]

      23 (return) [ Agathias, l. iv. p. 134.]

      The first counsel of the Magi was agreeable to the unsociable
      genius of their faith, 24 to the practice of ancient kings, 25
      and even to the example of their legislator, who had fallen a
      victim to a religious war, excited by his own intolerant zeal. 26
      By an edict of Artaxerxes, the exercise of every worship, except
      that of Zoroaster, was severely prohibited. The temples of the
      Parthians, and the statues of their deified monarchs, were thrown
      down with ignominy. 27 The sword of Aristotle (such was the name
      given by the Orientals to the polytheism and philosophy of the
      Greeks) was easily broken; 28 the flames of persecution soon
      reached the more stubborn Jews and Christians; 29 nor did they
      spare the heretics of their own nation and religion. The majesty
      of Ormusd, who was jealous of a rival, was seconded by the
      despotism of Artaxerxes, who could not suffer a rebel; and the
      schismatics within his vast empire were soon reduced to the
      inconsiderable number of eighty thousand. 30 301 This spirit of
      persecution reflects dishonor on the religion of Zoroaster; but
      as it was not productive of any civil commotion, it served to
      strengthen the new monarchy, by uniting all the various
      inhabitants of Persia in the bands of religious zeal. 302

      24 (return) [ Mr. Hume, in the Natural History of Religion,
      sagaciously remarks, that the most refined and philosophic sects
      are constantly the most intolerant. * Note: Hume’s comparison is
      rather between theism and polytheism. In India, in Greece, and in
      modern Europe, philosophic religion has looked down with
      contemptuous toleration on the superstitions of the vulgar.—M.]

      25 (return) [ Cicero de Legibus, ii. 10. Xerxes, by the advice of
      the Magi, destroyed the temples of Greece.]

      26 (return) [ Hyde de Relig. Persar. c. 23, 24. D’Herbelot,
      Bibliotheque Orientale, Zurdusht. Life of Zoroaster in tom. ii.
      of the Zendavesta.]

      27 (return) [ Compare Moses of Chorene, l. ii. c. 74, with
      Ammian. Marcel lin. xxiii. 6. Hereafter I shall make use of these
      passages.]

      28 (return) [ Rabbi Abraham, in the Tarikh Schickard, p. 108,
      109.]

      29 (return) [ Basnage, Histoire des Juifs, l. viii. c. 3.
      Sozomen, l. ii. c. 1 Manes, who suffered an ignominious death,
      may be deemed a Magian as well as a Christian heretic.]

      30 (return) [ Hyde de Religione Persar. c. 21.]

      301 (return) [ It is incorrect to attribute these persecutions to
      Artaxerxes. The Jews were held in honor by him, and their schools
      flourished during his reign. Compare Jost, Geschichte der
      Isræliter, b. xv. 5, with Basnage. Sapor was forced by the people
      to temporary severities; but their real persecution did not begin
      till the reigns of Yezdigerd and Kobad. Hist. of Jews, iii. 236.
      According to Sozomen, i. viii., Sapor first persecuted the
      Christians. Manes was put to death by Varanes the First, A. D.
      277. Beausobre, Hist. de Man. i. 209.—M.]

      302 (return) [ In the testament of Ardischer in Ferdusi, the poet
      assigns these sentiments to the dying king, as he addresses his
      son: Never forget that as a king, you are at once the protector
      of religion and of your country. Consider the altar and the
      throne as inseparable; they must always sustain each other.
      Malcolm’s Persia. i. 74—M]

      II. Artaxerxes, by his valor and conduct, had wrested the sceptre
      of the East from the ancient royal family of Parthia. There still
      remained the more difficult task of establishing, throughout the
      vast extent of Persia, a uniform and vigorous administration. The
      weak indulgence of the Arsacides had resigned to their sons and
      brothers the principal provinces, and the greatest offices of the
      kingdom in the nature of hereditary possessions. The _vitaxæ_, or
      eighteen most powerful satraps, were permitted to assume the
      regal title; and the vain pride of the monarch was delighted with
      a nominal dominion over so many vassal kings. Even tribes of
      barbarians in their mountains, and the Greek cities of Upper
      Asia, 31 within their walls, scarcely acknowledged, or seldom
      obeyed. any superior; and the Parthian empire exhibited, under
      other names, a lively image of the feudal system 32 which has
      since prevailed in Europe. But the active victor, at the head of
      a numerous and disciplined army, visited in person every province
      of Persia. The defeat of the boldest rebels, and the reduction of
      the strongest fortifications, 33 diffused the terror of his arms,
      and prepared the way for the peaceful reception of his authority.
      An obstinate resistance was fatal to the chiefs; but their
      followers were treated with lenity. 34 A cheerful submission was
      rewarded with honors and riches, but the prudent Artaxerxes,
      suffering no person except himself to assume the title of king,
      abolished every intermediate power between the throne and the
      people. His kingdom, nearly equal in extent to modern Persia,
      was, on every side, bounded by the sea, or by great rivers; by
      the Euphrates, the Tigris, the Araxes, the Oxus, and the Indus,
      by the Caspian Sea, and the Gulf of Persia. 35 That country was
      computed to contain, in the last century, five hundred and
      fifty-four cities, sixty thousand villages, and about forty
      millions of souls. 36 If we compare the administration of the
      house of Sassan with that of the house of Sefi, the political
      influence of the Magian with that of the Mahometan religion, we
      shall probably infer, that the kingdom of Artaxerxes contained at
      least as great a number of cities, villages, and inhabitants. But
      it must likewise be confessed, that in every age the want of
      harbors on the sea-coast, and the scarcity of fresh water in the
      inland provinces, have been very unfavorable to the commerce and
      agriculture of the Persians; who, in the calculation of their
      numbers, seem to have indulged one of the meanest, though most
      common, artifices of national vanity.

      31 (return) [ These colonies were extremely numerous. Seleucus
      Nicator founded thirty-nine cities, all named from himself, or
      some of his relations, (see Appian in Syriac. p. 124.) The æra of
      Seleucus (still in use among the eastern Christians) appears as
      late as the year 508, of Christ 196, on the medals of the Greek
      cities within the Parthian empire. See Moyle’s works, vol. i. p.
      273, &c., and M. Freret, Mem. de l’Academie, tom. xix.]

      32 (return) [ The modern Persians distinguish that period as the
      dynasty of the kings of the nations. See Plin. Hist. Nat. vi.
      25.]

      33 (return) [ Eutychius (tom. i. p. 367, 371, 375) relates the
      siege of the island of Mesene in the Tigris, with some
      circumstances not unlike the story of Nysus and Scylla.]

      34 (return) [ Agathias, ii. 64, [and iv. p. 260.] The princes of
      Segestan de fended their independence during many years. As
      romances generally transport to an ancient period the events of
      their own time, it is not impossible that the fabulous exploits
      of Rustan, Prince of Segestan, many have been grafted on this
      real history.]

      35 (return) [ We can scarcely attribute to the Persian monarchy
      the sea-coast of Gedrosia or Macran, which extends along the
      Indian Ocean from Cape Jask (the promontory Capella) to Cape
      Goadel. In the time of Alexander, and probably many ages
      afterwards, it was thinly inhabited by a savage people of
      Icthyophagi, or Fishermen, who knew no arts, who acknowledged no
      master, and who were divided by in-hospitable deserts from the
      rest of the world. (See Arrian de Reb. Indicis.) In the twelfth
      century, the little town of Taiz (supposed by M. d’Anville to be
      the Teza of Ptolemy) was peopled and enriched by the resort of
      the Arabian merchants. (See Geographia Nubiens, p. 58, and
      d’Anville, Geographie Ancienne, tom. ii. p. 283.) In the last
      age, the whole country was divided between three princes, one
      Mahometan and two Idolaters, who maintained their independence
      against the successors of Shah Abbas. (Voyages de Tavernier, part
      i. l. v. p. 635.)]

      36 (return) [ Chardin, tom. iii c 1 2, 3.]

      As soon as the ambitious mind of Artaxerxes had triumphed ever
      the resistance of his vassals, he began to threaten the
      neighboring states, who, during the long slumber of his
      predecessors, had insulted Persia with impunity. He obtained some
      easy victories over the wild Scythians and the effeminate
      Indians; but the Romans were an enemy, who, by their past
      injuries and present power, deserved the utmost efforts of his
      arms. A forty years’ tranquillity, the fruit of valor and
      moderation, had succeeded the victories of Trajan. During the
      period that elapsed from the accession of Marcus to the reign of
      Alexander, the Roman and the Parthian empires were twice engaged
      in war; and although the whole strength of the Arsacides
      contended with a part only of the forces of Rome, the event was
      most commonly in favor of the latter. Macrinus, indeed, prompted
      by his precarious situation and pusillanimous temper, purchased a
      peace at the expense of near two millions of our money; 37 but
      the generals of Marcus, the emperor Severus, and his son, erected
      many trophies in Armenia, Mesopotamia, and Assyria. Among their
      exploits, the imperfect relation of which would have unseasonably
      interrupted the more important series of domestic revolutions, we
      shall only mention the repeated calamities of the two great
      cities of Seleucia and Ctesiphon.

      37 (return) [ Dion, l. xxviii. p. 1335.]

      Seleucia, on the western bank of the Tigris, about forty-five
      miles to the north of ancient Babylon, was the capital of the
      Macedonian conquests in Upper Asia. 38 Many ages after the fall
      of their empire, Seleucia retained the genuine characters of a
      Grecian colony, arts, military virtue, and the love of freedom.
      The independent republic was governed by a senate of three
      hundred nobles; the people consisted of six hundred thousand
      citizens; the walls were strong, and as long as concord prevailed
      among the several orders of the state, they viewed with contempt
      the power of the Parthian: but the madness of faction was
      sometimes provoked to implore the dangerous aid of the common
      enemy, who was posted almost at the gates of the colony. 39 The
      Parthian monarchs, like the Mogul sovereigns of Hindostan,
      delighted in the pastoral life of their Scythian ancestors; and
      the Imperial camp was frequently pitched in the plain of
      Ctesiphon, on the eastern bank of the Tigris, at the distance of
      only three miles from Seleucia. 40 The innumerable attendants on
      luxury and despotism resorted to the court, and the little
      village of Ctesiphon insensibly swelled into a great city. 41
      Under the reign of Marcus, the Roman generals penetrated as far
      as Ctesiphon and Seleucia. They were received as friends by the
      Greek colony; they attacked as enemies the seat of the Parthian
      kings; yet both cities experienced the same treatment. The sack
      and conflagration of Seleucia, with the massacre of three hundred
      thousand of the inhabitants, tarnished the glory of the Roman
      triumph. 42 Seleucia, already exhausted by the neighborhood of a
      too powerful rival, sunk under the fatal blow; but Ctesiphon, in
      about thirty-three years, had sufficiently recovered its strength
      to maintain an obstinate siege against the emperor Severus. The
      city was, however, taken by assault; the king, who defended it in
      person, escaped with precipitation; a hundred thousand captives,
      and a rich booty, rewarded the fatigues of the Roman soldiers. 43
      Notwithstanding these misfortunes, Ctesiphon succeeded to Babylon
      and to Seleucia, as one of the great capitals of the East. In
      summer, the monarch of Persia enjoyed at Ecbatana the cool
      breezes of the mountains of Media; but the mildness of the
      climate engaged him to prefer Ctesiphon for his winter residence.

      38 (return) [ For the precise situation of Babylon, Seleucia,
      Ctesiphon, Moiain, and Bagdad, cities often confounded with each
      other, see an excellent Geographical Tract of M. d’Anville, in
      Mem. de l’Academie, tom. xxx.]

      39 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. xi. 42. Plin. Hist. Nat. vi. 26.]

      40 (return) [ This may be inferred from Strabo, l. xvi. p. 743.]

      41 (return) [ That most curious traveller, Bernier, who followed
      the camp of Aurengzebe from Delhi to Cashmir, describes with
      great accuracy the immense moving city. The guard of cavalry
      consisted of 35,000 men, that of infantry of 10,000. It was
      computed that the camp contained 150,000 horses, mules, and
      elephants; 50,000 camels, 50,000 oxen, and between 300,000 and
      400,000 persons. Almost all Delhi followed the court, whose
      magnificence supported its industry.]

      42 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxi. p. 1178. Hist. August. p. 38.
      Eutrop. viii. 10 Euseb. in Chronic. Quadratus (quoted in the
      Augustan History) attempted to vindicate the Romans by alleging
      that the citizens of Seleucia had first violated their faith.]

      43 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxv. p. 1263. Herodian, l. iii. p. 120.
      Hist. August. p. 70.]

      From these successful inroads the Romans derived no real or
      lasting benefit; nor did they attempt to preserve such distant
      conquests, separated from the provinces of the empire by a large
      tract of intermediate desert. The reduction of the kingdom of
      Osrhoene was an acquisition of less splendor indeed, but of a far
      more solid advantage. That little state occupied the northern and
      most fertile part of Mesopotamia, between the Euphrates and the
      Tigris. Edessa, its capital, was situated about twenty miles
      beyond the former of those rivers; and the inhabitants, since the
      time of Alexander, were a mixed race of Greeks, Arabs, Syrians,
      and Armenians. 44 The feeble sovereigns of Osrhoene, placed on
      the dangerous verge of two contending empires, were attached from
      inclination to the Parthian cause; but the superior power of Rome
      exacted from them a reluctant homage, which is still attested by
      their medals. After the conclusion of the Parthian war under
      Marcus, it was judged prudent to secure some substantial pledges
      of their doubtful fidelity. Forts were constructed in several
      parts of the country, and a Roman garrison was fixed in the
      strong town of Nisibis. During the troubles that followed the
      death of Commodus, the princes of Osrhoene attempted to shake off
      the yoke; but the stern policy of Severus confirmed their
      dependence, 45 and the perfidy of Caracalla completed the easy
      conquest. Abgarus, the last king of Edessa, was sent in chains to
      Rome, his dominions reduced into a province, and his capital
      dignified with the rank of colony; and thus the Romans, about ten
      years before the fall of the Parthian monarchy, obtained a firm
      and permanent establishment beyond the Euphrates. 46

      44 (return) [ The polished citizens of Antioch called those of
      Edessa mixed barbarians. It was, however, some praise, that of
      the three dialects of the Syriac, the purest and most elegant
      (the Aramæan) was spoken at Edessa. This remark M. Bayer (Hist.
      Edess. p 5) has borrowed from George of Malatia, a Syrian
      writer.]

      45 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxv. p. 1248, 1249, 1250. M. Bayer has
      neglected to use this most important passage.]

      46 (return) [ This kingdom, from Osrhoes, who gave a new name to
      the country, to the last Abgarus, had lasted 353 years. See the
      learned work of M. Bayer, Historia Osrhoena et Edessena.]

      Prudence as well as glory might have justified a war on the side
      of Artaxerxes, had his views been confined to the defence or
      acquisition of a useful frontier. but the ambitious Persian
      openly avowed a far more extensive design of conquest; and he
      thought himself able to support his lofty pretensions by the arms
      of reason as well as by those of power. Cyrus, he alleged, had
      first subdued, and his successors had for a long time possessed,
      the whole extent of Asia, as far as the Propontis and the Ægean
      Sea; the provinces of Caria and Ionia, under their empire, had
      been governed by Persian satraps, and all Egypt, to the confines
      of Æthiopia, had acknowledged their sovereignty. 47 Their rights
      had been suspended, but not destroyed, by a long usurpation; and
      as soon as he received the Persian diadem, which birth and
      successful valor had placed upon his head, the first great duty
      of his station called upon him to restore the ancient limits and
      splendor of the monarchy. The Great King, therefore, (such was
      the haughty style of his embassies to the emperor Alexander,)
      commanded the Romans instantly to depart from all the provinces
      of his ancestors, and, yielding to the Persians the empire of
      Asia, to content themselves with the undisturbed possession of
      Europe. This haughty mandate was delivered by four hundred of the
      tallest and most beautiful of the Persians; who, by their fine
      horses, splendid arms, and rich apparel, displayed the pride and
      greatness of their master. 48 Such an embassy was much less an
      offer of negotiation than a declaration of war. Both Alexander
      Severus and Artaxerxes, collecting the military force of the
      Roman and Persian monarchies, resolved in this important contest
      to lead their armies in person.

      47 (return) [ Xenophon, in the preface to the Cyropædia, gives a
      clear and magnificent idea of the extent of the empire of Cyrus.
      Herodotus (l. iii. c. 79, &c.) enters into a curious and
      particular description of the twenty great Satrapies into which
      the Persian empire was divided by Darius Hystaspes.]

      48 (return) [ Herodian, vi. 209, 212.]

      If we credit what should seem the most authentic of all records,
      an oration, still extant, and delivered by the emperor himself to
      the senate, we must allow that the victory of Alexander Severus
      was not inferior to any of those formerly obtained over the
      Persians by the son of Philip. The army of the Great King
      consisted of one hundred and twenty thousand horse, clothed in
      complete armor of steel; of seven hundred elephants, with towers
      filled with archers on their backs, and of eighteen hundred
      chariots armed with scythes. This formidable host, the like of
      which is not to be found in eastern history, and has scarcely
      been imagined in eastern romance, 49 was discomfited in a great
      battle, in which the Roman Alexander proved himself an intrepid
      soldier and a skilful general. The Great King fled before his
      valor; an immense booty, and the conquest of Mesopotamia, were
      the immediate fruits of this signal victory. Such are the
      circumstances of this ostentatious and improbable relation,
      dictated, as it too plainly appears, by the vanity of the
      monarch, adorned by the unblushing servility of his flatterers,
      and received without contradiction by a distant and obsequious
      senate. 50 Far from being inclined to believe that the arms of
      Alexander obtained any memorable advantage over the Persians, we
      are induced to suspect that all this blaze of imaginary glory was
      designed to conceal some real disgrace.

      49 (return) [ There were two hundred scythed chariots at the
      battle of Arbela, in the host of Darius. In the vast army of
      Tigranes, which was vanquished by Lucullus, seventeen thousand
      horse only were completely armed. Antiochus brought fifty-four
      elephants into the field against the Romans: by his frequent wars
      and negotiations with the princes of India, he had once collected
      a hundred and fifty of those great animals; but it may be
      questioned whether the most powerful monarch of Hindostan evci
      formed a line of battle of seven hundred elephants. Instead of
      three or four thousand elephants, which the Great Mogul was
      supposed to possess, Tavernier (Voyages, part ii. l. i. p. 198)
      discovered, by a more accurate inquiry, that he had only five
      hundred for his baggage, and eighty or ninety for the service of
      war. The Greeks have varied with regard to the number which Porus
      brought into the field; but Quintus Curtius, (viii. 13,) in this
      instance judicious and moderate, is contented with eighty-five
      elephants, distinguished by their size and strength. In Siam,
      where these animals are the most numerous and the most esteemed,
      eighteen elephants are allowed as a sufficient proportion for
      each of the nine brigades into which a just army is divided. The
      whole number, of one hundred and sixty-two elephants of war, may
      sometimes be doubled. Hist. des Voyages, tom. ix. p. 260. * Note:
      Compare Gibbon’s note 10 to ch. lvii—M.]

      50 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 133. * Note: See M. Guizot’s note,
      p. 267. According to the Persian authorities Ardeschir extended
      his conquests to the Euphrates. Malcolm i. 71.—M.]

      Our suspicions are confirmed by the authority of a contemporary
      historian, who mentions the virtues of Alexander with respect,
      and his faults with candor. He describes the judicious plan which
      had been formed for the conduct of the war. Three Roman armies
      were destined to invade Persia at the same time, and by different
      roads. But the operations of the campaign, though wisely
      concerted, were not executed either with ability or success. The
      first of these armies, as soon as it had entered the marshy
      plains of Babylon, towards the artificial conflux of the
      Euphrates and the Tigris, 51 was encompassed by the superior
      numbers, and destroyed by the arrows of the enemy. The alliance
      of Chosroes, king of Armenia, 52 and the long tract of
      mountainous country, in which the Persian cavalry was of little
      service, opened a secure entrance into the heart of Media, to the
      second of the Roman armies. These brave troops laid waste the
      adjacent provinces, and by several successful actions against
      Artaxerxes, gave a faint color to the emperor’s vanity. But the
      retreat of this victorious army was imprudent, or at least
      unfortunate. In repassing the mountains, great numbers of
      soldiers perished by the badness of the roads, and the severity
      of the winter season. It had been resolved, that whilst these two
      great detachments penetrated into the opposite extremes of the
      Persian dominions, the main body, under the command of Alexander
      himself, should support their attack, by invading the centre of
      the kingdom. But the unexperienced youth, influenced by his
      mother’s counsels, and perhaps by his own fears, deserted the
      bravest troops, and the fairest prospect of victory; and after
      consuming in Mesopotamia an inactive and inglorious summer, he
      led back to Antioch an army diminished by sickness, and provoked
      by disappointment. The behavior of Artaxerxes had been very
      different. Flying with rapidity from the hills of Media to the
      marshes of the Euphrates, he had everywhere opposed the invaders
      in person; and in either fortune had united with the ablest
      conduct the most undaunted resolution. But in several obstinate
      engagements against the veteran legions of Rome, the Persian
      monarch had lost the flower of his troops. Even his victories had
      weakened his power. The favorable opportunities of the absence of
      Alexander, and of the confusions that followed that emperor’s
      death, presented themselves in vain to his ambition. Instead of
      expelling the Romans, as he pretended, from the continent of
      Asia, he found himself unable to wrest from their hands the
      little province of Mesopotamia. 53

      51 (return) [ M. de Tillemont has already observed, that
      Herodian’s geography is somewhat confused.]

      52 (return) [ Moses of Chorene (Hist. Armen. l. ii. c. 71)
      illustrates this invasion of Media, by asserting that Chosroes,
      king of Armenia, defeated Artaxerxes, and pursued him to the
      confines of India. The exploits of Chosroes have been magnified;
      and he acted as a dependent ally to the Romans.]

      53 (return) [ For the account of this war, see Herodian, l. vi.
      p. 209, 212. The old abbreviators and modern compilers have
      blindly followed the Augustan History.]

      The reign of Artaxerxes, which, from the last defeat of the
      Parthians, lasted only fourteen years, forms a memorable æra in
      the history of the East, and even in that of Rome. His character
      seems to have been marked by those bold and commanding features,
      that generally distinguish the princes who conquer, from those
      who inherit, an empire. Till the last period of the Persian
      monarchy, his code of laws was respected as the groundwork of
      their civil and religious policy. 54 Several of his sayings are
      preserved. One of them in particular discovers a deep insight
      into the constitution of government. “The authority of the
      prince,” said Artaxerxes, “must be defended by a military force;
      that force can only be maintained by taxes; all taxes must, at
      last, fall upon agriculture; and agriculture can never flourish
      except under the protection of justice and moderation.” 55
      Artaxerxes bequeathed his new empire, and his ambitious designs
      against the Romans, to Sapor, a son not unworthy of his great
      father; but those designs were too extensive for the power of
      Persia, and served only to involve both nations in a long series
      of destructive wars and reciprocal calamities.

      54 (return) [Eutychius, tom. ii. p. 180, vers. Pocock. The great
      Chosroes Noushirwan sent the code of Artaxerxes to all his
      satraps, as the invariable rule of their conduct.]

      55 (return) [ D’Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientale, au mot Ardshir.
      We may observe, that after an ancient period of fables, and a
      long interval of darkness, the modern histories of Persia begin
      to assume an air of truth with the dynasty of Sassanides. Compare
      Malcolm, i. 79.—M.]

      The Persians, long since civilized and corrupted, were very far
      from possessing the martial independence, and the intrepid
      hardiness, both of mind and body, which have rendered the
      northern barbarians masters of the world. The science of war,
      that constituted the more rational force of Greece and Rome, as
      it now does of Europe, never made any considerable progress in
      the East. Those disciplined evolutions which harmonize and
      animate a confused multitude, were unknown to the Persians. They
      were equally unskilled in the arts of constructing, besieging, or
      defending regular fortifications. They trusted more to their
      numbers than to their courage; more to their courage than to
      their discipline. The infantry was a half-armed, spiritless crowd
      of peasants, levied in haste by the allurements of plunder, and
      as easily dispersed by a victory as by a defeat. The monarch and
      his nobles transported into the camp the pride and luxury of the
      seraglio. Their military operations were impeded by a useless
      train of women, eunuchs, horses, and camels; and in the midst of
      a successful campaign, the Persian host was often separated or
      destroyed by an unexpected famine. 56

      56 (return) [ Herodian, l. vi. p. 214. Ammianus Marcellinus, l.
      xxiii. c. 6. Some differences may be observed between the two
      historians, the natural effects of the changes produced by a
      century and a half.]

      But the nobles of Persia, in the bosom of luxury and despotism,
      preserved a strong sense of personal gallantry and national
      honor. From the age of seven years they were taught to speak
      truth, to shoot with the bow, and to ride; and it was universally
      confessed that in the two last of these arts they had made a more
      than common proficiency. 57 The most distinguished youth were
      educated under the monarch’s eye, practised their exercises in
      the gate of his palace, and were severely trained up to the
      habits of temperance and obedience, in their long and laborious
      parties of hunting. In every province, the satrap maintained a
      like school of military virtue. The Persian nobles (so natural is
      the idea of feudal tenures) received from the king’s bounty lands
      and houses, on the condition of their service in war. They were
      ready on the first summons to mount on horseback, with a martial
      and splendid train of followers, and to join the numerous bodies
      of guards, who were carefully selected from among the most robust
      slaves, and the bravest adventurers of Asia. These armies, both
      of light and of heavy cavalry, equally formidable by the
      impetuosity of their charge and the rapidity of their motions,
      threatened, as an impending cloud, the eastern provinces of the
      declining empire of Rome. 58

      57 (return) [ The Persians are still the most skilful horsemen,
      and their horses the finest in the East.]

      58 (return) [ From Herodotus, Xenophon, Herodian, Ammianus,
      Chardin, &c., I have extracted such probable accounts of the
      Persian nobility, as seem either common to every age, or
      particular to that of the Sassanides.]




      