Chapter XXVI: Progress of The Huns.ÑPart I.

     Manners Of The Pastoral Nations.ÑProgress Of The Huns, From China
     To Europe.ÑFlight Of The Goths.ÑThey Pass The Danube.ÑGothic
     War.ÑDefeat And Death Of Valens.ÑGratian Invests Theodosius With
     The Eastern Empire.ÑHis Character And Success.ÑPeace And
     Settlement Of The Goths.


      In the second year of the reign of Valentinian and Valens, on the
      morning of the twenty-first day of July, the greatest part of the
      Roman world was shaken by a violent and destructive earthquake.
      The impression was communicated to the waters; the shores of the
      Mediterranean were left dry, by the sudden retreat of the sea;
      great quantities of fish were caught with the hand; large vessels
      were stranded on the mud; and a curious spectator 1 amused his
      eye, or rather his fancy, by contemplating the various appearance
      of valleys and mountains, which had never, since the formation of
      the globe, been exposed to the sun. But the tide soon returned,
      with the weight of an immense and irresistible deluge, which was
      severely felt on the coasts of Sicily, of Dalmatia, of Greece,
      and of Egypt: large boats were transported, and lodged on the
      roofs of houses, or at the distance of two miles from the shore;
      the people, with their habitations, were swept away by the
      waters; and the city of Alexandria annually commemorated the
      fatal day, on which fifty thousand persons had lost their lives
      in the inundation. This calamity, the report of which was
      magnified from one province to another, astonished and terrified
      the subjects of Rome; and their affrighted imagination enlarged
      the real extent of a momentary evil. They recollected the
      preceding earthquakes, which had subverted the cities of
      Palestine and Bithynia: they considered these alarming strokes as
      the prelude only of still more dreadful calamities, and their
      fearful vanity was disposed to confound the symptoms of a
      declining empire and a sinking world. 2 It was the fashion of the
      times to attribute every remarkable event to the particular will
      of the Deity; the alterations of nature were connected, by an
      invisible chain, with the moral and metaphysical opinions of the
      human mind; and the most sagacious divines could distinguish,
      according to the color of their respective prejudices, that the
      establishment of heresy tended to produce an earthquake; or that
      a deluge was the inevitable consequence of the progress of sin
      and error. Without presuming to discuss the truth or propriety of
      these lofty speculations, the historian may content himself with
      an observation, which seems to be justified by experience, that
      man has much more to fear from the passions of his
      fellow-creatures, than from the convulsions of the elements. 3
      The mischievous effects of an earthquake, or deluge, a hurricane,
      or the eruption of a volcano, bear a very inconsiderable portion
      to the ordinary calamities of war, as they are now moderated by
      the prudence or humanity of the princes of Europe, who amuse
      their own leisure, and exercise the courage of their subjects, in
      the practice of the military art. But the laws and manners of
      modern nations protect the safety and freedom of the vanquished
      soldier; and the peaceful citizen has seldom reason to complain,
      that his life, or even his fortune, is exposed to the rage of
      war. In the disastrous period of the fall of the Roman empire,
      which may justly be dated from the reign of Valens, the happiness
      and security of each individual were personally attacked; and the
      arts and labors of ages were rudely defaced by the Barbarians of
      Scythia and Germany. The invasion of the Huns precipitated on the
      provinces of the West the Gothic nation, which advanced, in less
      than forty years, from the Danube to the Atlantic, and opened a
      way, by the success of their arms, to the inroads of so many
      hostile tribes, more savage than themselves. The original
      principle of motion was concealed in the remote countries of the
      North; and the curious observation of the pastoral life of the
      Scythians, 4 or Tartars, 5 will illustrate the latent cause of
      these destructive emigrations.

      1 (return) [ Such is the bad taste of Ammianus, (xxvi. 10,) that
      it is not easy to distinguish his facts from his metaphors. Yet
      he positively affirms, that he saw the rotten carcass of a ship,
      _ad decundum lapidem_, at Mothone, or Modon, in Peloponnesus.]

      2 (return) [ The earthquakes and inundations are variously
      described by Libanius, (Orat. de ulciscenda Juliani nece, c. x.,
      in Fabricius, Bibl. Gr¾c. tom. vii. p. 158, with a learned note
      of Olearius,) Zosimus, (l. iv. p. 221,) Sozomen, (l. vi. c. 2,)
      Cedrenus, (p. 310, 314,) and Jerom, (in Chron. p. 186, and tom.
      i. p. 250, in Vit. Hilarion.) Epidaurus must have been
      overwhelmed, had not the prudent citizens placed St. Hilarion, an
      Egyptian monk, on the beach. He made the sign of the Cross; the
      mountain-wave stopped, bowed, and returned.]

      3 (return) [ Dic¾archus, the Peripatetic, composed a formal
      treatise, to prove this obvious truth; which is not the most
      honorable to the human species. (Cicero, de Officiis, ii. 5.)]

      4 (return) [ The original Scythians of Herodotus (l. iv. c.
      47Ñ57, 99Ñ101) were confined, by the Danube and the Palus M¾otis,
      within a square of 4000 stadia, (400 Roman miles.) See DÕAnville
      (MŽm. de lÕAcadŽmie, tom. xxxv. p. 573Ñ591.) Diodorus Siculus
      (tom. i. l. ii. p. 155, edit. Wesseling) has marked the gradual
      progress of the _name_ and nation.]

      5 (return) [ The _Tatars_, or Tartars, were a primitive tribe,
      the rivals, and at length the subjects, of the Moguls. In the
      victorious armies of Zingis Khan, and his successors, the Tartars
      formed the vanguard; and the name, which first reached the ears
      of foreigners, was applied to the whole nation, (Freret, in the
      Hist. de lÕAcadŽmie, tom. xviii. p. 60.) In speaking of all, or
      any of the northern shepherds of Europe, or Asia, I indifferently
      use the appellations of _Scythians_ or _Tartars_. * Note: The
      Moguls, (Mongols,) according to M. Klaproth, are a tribe of the
      Tartar nation. Tableaux Hist. de lÕAsie, p. 154.ÑM.]

      The different characters that mark the civilized nations of the
      globe, may be ascribed to the use, and the abuse, of reason;
      which so variously shapes, and so artificially composes, the
      manners and opinions of a European, or a Chinese. But the
      operation of instinct is more sure and simple than that of
      reason: it is much easier to ascertain the appetites of a
      quadruped than the speculations of a philosopher; and the savage
      tribes of mankind, as they approach nearer to the condition of
      animals, preserve a stronger resemblance to themselves and to
      each other. The uniform stability of their manners is the natural
      consequence of the imperfection of their faculties. Reduced to a
      similar situation, their wants, their desires, their enjoyments,
      still continue the same: and the influence of food or climate,
      which, in a more improved state of society, is suspended, or
      subdued, by so many moral causes, most powerfully contributes to
      form, and to maintain, the national character of Barbarians. In
      every age, the immense plains of Scythia, or Tartary, have been
      inhabited by vagrant tribes of hunters and shepherds, whose
      indolence refuses to cultivate the earth, and whose restless
      spirit disdains the confinement of a sedentary life. In every
      age, the Scythians, and Tartars, have been renowned for their
      invincible courage and rapid conquests. The thrones of Asia have
      been repeatedly overturned by the shepherds of the North; and
      their arms have spread terror and devastation over the most
      fertile and warlike countries of Europe. 6 On this occasion, as
      well as on many others, the sober historian is forcibly awakened
      from a pleasing vision; and is compelled, with some reluctance,
      to confess, that the pastoral manners, which have been adorned
      with the fairest attributes of peace and innocence, are much
      better adapted to the fierce and cruel habits of a military life.
      To illustrate this observation, I shall now proceed to consider a
      nation of shepherds and of warriors, in the three important
      articles of, I. Their diet; II. Their habitations; and, III.
      Their exercises. The narratives of antiquity are justified by the
      experience of modern times; 7 and the banks of the Borysthenes,
      of the Volga, or of the Selinga, will indifferently present the
      same uniform spectacle of similar and native manners. 8

      6 (return) [ Imperium Asi¾ _ter_ qu¾sivere: ipsi perpetuo ab
      alieno imperio, aut intacti aut invicti, mansere. Since the time
      of Justin, (ii. 2,) they have multiplied this account. Voltaire,
      in a few words, (tom. x. p. 64, Hist. Generale, c. 156,) has
      abridged the Tartar conquests.

      Oft oÕer the trembling nations from afar,
      Has Scythia breathed the living cloud of war.
      Note *: Gray.ÑM.]

      7 (return) [ The fourth book of Herodotus affords a curious
      though imperfect, portrait of the Scythians. Among the moderns,
      who describe the uniform scene, the Khan of Khowaresm, Abulghazi
      Bahadur, expresses his native feelings; and his genealogical
      history of the Tartars has been copiously illustrated by the
      French and English editors. Carpin, Ascelin, and Rubruquis (in
      the Hist. des Voyages, tom. vii.) represent the Moguls of the
      fourteenth century. To these guides I have added Gerbillon, and
      the other Jesuits, (Description de la China par du Halde, tom.
      iv.,) who accurately surveyed the Chinese Tartary; and that
      honest and intelligent traveller, Bell, of Antermony, (two
      volumes in 4to. Glasgow, 1763.) * Note: Of the various works
      published since the time of Gibbon, which throw fight on the
      nomadic population of Central Asia, may be particularly remarked
      the Travels and Dissertations of Pallas; and above all, the very
      curious work of Bergman, Nomadische Streifereyen. Riga, 1805.ÑM.]

      8 (return) [ The Uzbecks are the most altered from their
      primitive manners; 1. By the profession of the Mahometan
      religion; and 2. By the possession of the cities and harvests of
      the great Bucharia.]

      I. The corn, or even the rice, which constitutes the ordinary and
      wholesome food of a civilized people, can be obtained only by the
      patient toil of the husbandman. Some of the happy savages, who
      dwell between the tropics, are plentifully nourished by the
      liberality of nature; but in the climates of the North, a nation
      of shepherds is reduced to their flocks and herds. The skilful
      practitioners of the medical art will determine (if they are able
      to determine) how far the temper of the human mind may be
      affected by the use of animal, or of vegetable, food; and whether
      the common association of carniverous and cruel deserves to be
      considered in any other light than that of an innocent, perhaps a
      salutary, prejudice of humanity. 9 Yet, if it be true, that the
      sentiment of compassion is imperceptibly weakened by the sight
      and practice of domestic cruelty, we may observe, that the horrid
      objects which are disguised by the arts of European refinement,
      are exhibited in their naked and most disgusting simplicity in
      the tent of a Tartarian shepherd. The ox, or the sheep, are
      slaughtered by the same hand from which they were accustomed to
      receive their daily food; and the bleeding limbs are served, with
      very little preparation, on the table of their unfeeling
      murderer. In the military profession, and especially in the
      conduct of a numerous army, the exclusive use of animal food
      appears to be productive of the most solid advantages. Corn is a
      bulky and perishable commodity; and the large magazines, which
      are indispensably necessary for the subsistence of our troops,
      must be slowly transported by the labor of men or horses. But the
      flocks and herds, which accompany the march of the Tartars,
      afford a sure and increasing supply of flesh and milk: in the far
      greater part of the uncultivated waste, the vegetation of the
      grass is quick and luxuriant; and there are few places so
      extremely barren, that the hardy cattle of the North cannot find
      some tolerable pasture.

      The supply is multiplied and prolonged by the undistinguishing
      appetite, and patient abstinence, of the Tartars. They
      indifferently feed on the flesh of those animals that have been
      killed for the table, or have died of disease. Horseflesh, which
      in every age and country has been proscribed by the civilized
      nations of Europe and Asia, they devour with peculiar greediness;
      and this singular taste facilitates the success of their military
      operations. The active cavalry of Scythia is always followed, in
      their most distant and rapid incursions, by an adequate number of
      spare horses, who may be occasionally used, either to redouble
      the speed, or to satisfy the hunger, of the Barbarians. Many are
      the resources of courage and poverty. When the forage round a
      camp of Tartars is almost consumed, they slaughter the greatest
      part of their cattle, and preserve the flesh, either smoked, or
      dried in the sun. On the sudden emergency of a hasty march, they
      provide themselves with a sufficient quantity of little balls of
      cheese, or rather of hard curd, which they occasionally dissolve
      in water; and this unsubstantial diet will support, for many
      days, the life, and even the spirits, of the patient warrior. But
      this extraordinary abstinence, which the Stoic would approve, and
      the hermit might envy, is commonly succeeded by the most
      voracious indulgence of appetite. The wines of a happier climate
      are the most grateful present, or the most valuable commodity,
      that can be offered to the Tartars; and the only example of their
      industry seems to consist in the art of extracting from mareÕs
      milk a fermented liquor, which possesses a very strong power of
      intoxication. Like the animals of prey, the savages, both of the
      old and new world, experience the alternate vicissitudes of
      famine and plenty; and their stomach is inured to sustain,
      without much inconvenience, the opposite extremes of hunger and
      of intemperance.

      9 (return) [ Il est certain que les grands mangeurs de viande
      sont en gŽnŽral cruels et fŽroces plus que les autres hommes.
      Cette observation est de tous les lieux, et de tous les temps: la
      barbarie Angloise est connue, &c. Emile de Rousseau, tom. i. p.
      274. Whatever we may think of the general observation, _we_ shall
      not easily allow the truth of his example. The good-natured
      complaints of Plutarch, and the pathetic lamentations of Ovid,
      seduce our reason, by exciting our sensibility.]

      II. In the ages of rustic and martial simplicity, a people of
      soldiers and husbandmen are dispersed over the face of an
      extensive and cultivated country; and some time must elapse
      before the warlike youth of Greece or Italy could be assembled
      under the same standard, either to defend their own confines, or
      to invade the territories of the adjacent tribes. The progress of
      manufactures and commerce insensibly collects a large multitude
      within the walls of a city: but these citizens are no longer
      soldiers; and the arts which adorn and improve the state of civil
      society, corrupt the habits of the military life. The pastoral
      manners of the Scythians seem to unite the different advantages
      of simplicity and refinement. The individuals of the same tribe
      are constantly assembled, but they are assembled in a camp; and
      the native spirit of these dauntless shepherds is animated by
      mutual support and emulation. The houses of the Tartars are no
      more than small tents, of an oval form, which afford a cold and
      dirty habitation, for the promiscuous youth of both sexes. The
      palaces of the rich consist of wooden huts, of such a size that
      they may be conveniently fixed on large wagons, and drawn by a
      team perhaps of twenty or thirty oxen. The flocks and herds,
      after grazing all day in the adjacent pastures, retire, on the
      approach of night, within the protection of the camp. The
      necessity of preventing the most mischievous confusion, in such a
      perpetual concourse of men and animals, must gradually introduce,
      in the distribution, the order, and the guard, of the encampment,
      the rudiments of the military art. As soon as the forage of a
      certain district is consumed, the tribe, or rather army, of
      shepherds, makes a regular march to some fresh pastures; and thus
      acquires, in the ordinary occupations of the pastoral life, the
      practical knowledge of one of the most important and difficult
      operations of war. The choice of stations is regulated by the
      difference of the seasons: in the summer, the Tartars advance
      towards the North, and pitch their tents on the banks of a river,
      or, at least, in the neighborhood of a running stream. But in the
      winter, they return to the South, and shelter their camp, behind
      some convenient eminence, against the winds, which are chilled in
      their passage over the bleak and icy regions of Siberia. These
      manners are admirably adapted to diffuse, among the wandering
      tribes, the spirit of emigration and conquest. The connection
      between the people and their territory is of so frail a texture,
      that it may be broken by the slightest accident. The camp, and
      not the soil, is the native country of the genuine Tartar. Within
      the precincts of that camp, his family, his companions, his
      property, are always included; and, in the most distant marches,
      he is still surrounded by the objects which are dear, or
      valuable, or familiar in his eyes. The thirst of rapine, the
      fear, or the resentment of injury, the impatience of servitude,
      have, in every age, been sufficient causes to urge the tribes of
      Scythia boldly to advance into some unknown countries, where they
      might hope to find a more plentiful subsistence or a less
      formidable enemy. The revolutions of the North have frequently
      determined the fate of the South; and in the conflict of hostile
      nations, the victor and the vanquished have alternately drove,
      and been driven, from the confines of China to those of Germany.
      10 These great emigrations, which have been sometimes executed
      with almost incredible diligence, were rendered more easy by the
      peculiar nature of the climate. It is well known that the cold of
      Tartary is much more severe than in the midst of the temperate
      zone might reasonably be expected; this uncommon rigor is
      attributed to the height of the plains, which rise, especially
      towards the East, more than half a mile above the level of the
      sea; and to the quantity of saltpetre with which the soil is
      deeply impregnated. 11 In the winter season, the broad and rapid
      rivers, that discharge their waters into the Euxine, the Caspian,
      or the Icy Sea, are strongly frozen; the fields are covered with
      a bed of snow; and the fugitive, or victorious, tribes may
      securely traverse, with their families, their wagons, and their
      cattle, the smooth and hard surface of an immense plain.

      10 (return) [ These Tartar emigrations have been discovered by M.
      de Guignes (Histoire des Huns, tom. i. ii.) a skilful and
      laborious interpreter of the Chinese language; who has thus laid
      open new and important scenes in the history of mankind.]

      11 (return) [ A plain in the Chinese Tartary, only eighty leagues
      from the great wall, was found by the missionaries to be three
      thousand geometrical paces above the level of the sea.
      Montesquieu, who has used, and abused, the relations of
      travellers, deduces the revolutions of Asia from this important
      circumstance, that heat and cold, weakness and strength, touch
      each other without any temperate zone, (Esprit des Loix, l. xvii.
      c. 3.)]

      III. The pastoral life, compared with the labors of agriculture
      and manufactures, is undoubtedly a life of idleness; and as the
      most honorable shepherds of the Tartar race devolve on their
      captives the domestic management of the cattle, their own leisure
      is seldom disturbed by any servile and assiduous cares. But this
      leisure, instead of being devoted to the soft enjoyments of love
      and harmony, is usefully spent in the violent and sanguinary
      exercise of the chase. The plains of Tartary are filled with a
      strong and serviceable breed of horses, which are easily trained
      for the purposes of war and hunting. The Scythians of every age
      have been celebrated as bold and skilful riders; and constant
      practice had seated them so firmly on horseback, that they were
      supposed by strangers to perform the ordinary duties of civil
      life, to eat, to drink, and even to sleep, without dismounting
      from their steeds. They excel in the dexterous management of the
      lance; the long Tartar bow is drawn with a nervous arm; and the
      weighty arrow is directed to its object with unerring aim and
      irresistible force. These arrows are often pointed against the
      harmless animals of the desert, which increase and multiply in
      the absence of their most formidable enemy; the hare, the goat,
      the roebuck, the fallow-deer, the stag, the elk, and the
      antelope. The vigor and patience, both of the men and horses, are
      continually exercised by the fatigues of the chase; and the
      plentiful supply of game contributes to the subsistence, and even
      luxury, of a Tartar camp. But the exploits of the hunters of
      Scythia are not confined to the destruction of timid or innoxious
      beasts; they boldly encounter the angry wild boar, when he turns
      against his pursuers, excite the sluggish courage of the bear,
      and provoke the fury of the tiger, as he slumbers in the thicket.
      Where there is danger, there may be glory; and the mode of
      hunting, which opens the fairest field to the exertions of valor,
      may justly be considered as the image, and as the school, of war.
      The general hunting matches, the pride and delight of the Tartar
      princes, compose an instructive exercise for their numerous
      cavalry. A circle is drawn, of many miles in circumference, to
      encompass the game of an extensive district; and the troops that
      form the circle regularly advance towards a common centre; where
      the captive animals, surrounded on every side, are abandoned to
      the darts of the hunters. In this march, which frequently
      continues many days, the cavalry are obliged to climb the hills,
      to swim the rivers, and to wind through the valleys, without
      interrupting the prescribed order of their gradual progress. They
      acquire the habit of directing their eye, and their steps, to a
      remote object; of preserving their intervals of suspending or
      accelerating their pace, according to the motions of the troops
      on their right and left; and of watching and repeating the
      signals of their leaders. Their leaders study, in this practical
      school, the most important lesson of the military art; the prompt
      and accurate judgment of ground, of distance, and of time. To
      employ against a human enemy the same patience and valor, the
      same skill and discipline, is the only alteration which is
      required in real war; and the amusements of the chase serve as a
      prelude to the conquest of an empire. 12

      12 (return) [ Petit de la Croix (Vie de Gengiscan, l. iii. c. 6)
      represents the full glory and extent of the Mogul chase. The
      Jesuits Gerbillon and Verbiest followed the emperor Khamhi when
      he hunted in Tartary, (Duhalde, DŽscription de la Chine, tom. iv.
      p. 81, 290, &c., folio edit.) His grandson, Kienlong, who unites
      the Tartar discipline with the laws and learning of China,
      describes (Eloge de Moukden, p. 273Ñ285) as a poet the pleasures
      which he had often enjoyed as a sportsman.]

      The political society of the ancient Germans has the appearance
      of a voluntary alliance of independent warriors. The tribes of
      Scythia, distinguished by the modern appellation of _Hords_,
      assume the form of a numerous and increasing family; which, in
      the course of successive generations, has been propagated from
      the same original stock. The meanest, and most ignorant, of the
      Tartars, preserve, with conscious pride, the inestimable treasure
      of their genealogy; and whatever distinctions of rank may have
      been introduced, by the unequal distribution of pastoral wealth,
      they mutually respect themselves, and each other, as the
      descendants of the first founder of the tribe. The custom, which
      still prevails, of adopting the bravest and most faithful of the
      captives, may countenance the very probable suspicion, that this
      extensive consanguinity is, in a great measure, legal and
      fictitious. But the useful prejudice, which has obtained the
      sanction of time and opinion, produces the effects of truth; the
      haughty Barbarians yield a cheerful and voluntary obedience to
      the head of their blood; and their chief, or _mursa_, as the
      representative of their great father, exercises the authority of
      a judge in peace, and of a leader in war. In the original state
      of the pastoral world, each of the _mursas_ (if we may continue
      to use a modern appellation) acted as the independent chief of a
      large and separate family; and the limits of their peculiar
      territories were gradually fixed by superior force, or mutual
      consent. But the constant operation of various and permanent
      causes contributed to unite the vagrant Hords into national
      communities, under the command of a supreme head. The weak were
      desirous of support, and the strong were ambitious of dominion;
      the power, which is the result of union, oppressed and collected
      the divided force of the adjacent tribes; and, as the vanquished
      were freely admitted to share the advantages of victory, the most
      valiant chiefs hastened to range themselves and their followers
      under the formidable standard of a confederate nation. The most
      successful of the Tartar princes assumed the military command, to
      which he was entitled by the superiority, either of merit or of
      power. He was raised to the throne by the acclamations of his
      equals; and the title of _Khan_ expresses, in the language of the
      North of Asia, the full extent of the regal dignity. The right of
      hereditary succession was long confined to the blood of the
      founder of the monarchy; and at this moment all the Khans, who
      reign from Crimea to the wall of China, are the lineal
      descendants of the renowned Zingis. 13 But, as it is the
      indispensable duty of a Tartar sovereign to lead his warlike
      subjects into the field, the claims of an infant are often
      disregarded; and some royal kinsman, distinguished by his age and
      valor, is intrusted with the sword and sceptre of his
      predecessor. Two distinct and regular taxes are levied on the
      tribes, to support the dignity of the national monarch, and of
      their peculiar chief; and each of those contributions amounts to
      the tithe, both of their property, and of their spoil. A Tartar
      sovereign enjoys the tenth part of the wealth of his people; and
      as his own domestic riches of flocks and herds increase in a much
      larger proportion, he is able plentifully to maintain the rustic
      splendor of his court, to reward the most deserving, or the most
      favored of his followers, and to obtain, from the gentle
      influence of corruption, the obedience which might be sometimes
      refused to the stern mandates of authority. The manners of his
      subjects, accustomed, like himself, to blood and rapine, might
      excuse, in their eyes, such partial acts of tyranny, as would
      excite the horror of a civilized people; but the power of a
      despot has never been acknowledged in the deserts of Scythia. The
      immediate jurisdiction of the khan is confined within the limits
      of his own tribe; and the exercise of his royal prerogative has
      been moderated by the ancient institution of a national council.
      The Coroulai, 14 or Diet, of the Tartars, was regularly held in
      the spring and autumn, in the midst of a plain; where the princes
      of the reigning family, and the mursas of the respective tribes,
      may conveniently assemble on horseback, with their martial and
      numerous trains; and the ambitious monarch, who reviewed the
      strength, must consult the inclination of an armed people. The
      rudiments of a feudal government may be discovered in the
      constitution of the Scythian or Tartar nations; but the perpetual
      conflict of those hostile nations has sometimes terminated in the
      establishment of a powerful and despotic empire. The victor,
      enriched by the tribute, and fortified by the arms of dependent
      kings, has spread his conquests over Europe or Asia: the
      successful shepherds of the North have submitted to the
      confinement of arts, of laws, and of cities; and the introduction
      of luxury, after destroying the freedom of the people, has
      undermined the foundations of the throne. 15

      13 (return) [ See the second volume of the Genealogical History
      of the Tartars; and the list of the Khans, at the end of the life
      of GengÕs, or Zingis. Under the reign of Timur, or Tamerlane, one
      of his subjects, a descendant of Zingis, still bore the regal
      appellation of Khan and the conqueror of Asia contented himself
      with the title of Emir or Sultan. Abulghazi, part v. c. 4.
      DÕHerbelot, Bibliothque Orien tale, p. 878.]

      14 (return) [ See the Diets of the ancient Huns, (De Guignes,
      tom. ii. p. 26,) and a curious description of those of Zingis,
      (Vie de Gengiscan, l. i. c. 6, l. iv. c. 11.) Such assemblies are
      frequently mentioned in the Persian history of Timur; though they
      served only to countenance the resolutions of their master.]

      15 (return) [ Montesquieu labors to explain a difference, which
      has not existed, between the liberty of the Arabs, and the
      _perpetual_ slavery of the Tartars. (Esprit des Loix, l. xvii. c.
      5, l. xviii. c. 19, &c.)]

      The memory of past events cannot long be preserved in the
      frequent and remote emigrations of illiterate Barbarians. The
      modern Tartars are ignorant of the conquests of their ancestors;
      16 and our knowledge of the history of the Scythians is derived
      from their intercourse with the learned and civilized nations of
      the South, the Greeks, the Persians, and the Chinese. The Greeks,
      who navigated the Euxine, and planted their colonies along the
      sea-coast, made the gradual and imperfect discovery of Scythia;
      from the Danube, and the confines of Thrace, as far as the frozen
      M¾otis, the seat of eternal winter, and Mount Caucasus, which, in
      the language of poetry, was described as the utmost boundary of
      the earth. They celebrated, with simple credulity, the virtues of
      the pastoral life: 17 they entertained a more rational
      apprehension of the strength and numbers of the warlike
      Barbarians, 18 who contemptuously baffled the immense armament of
      Darius, the son of Hystaspes. 19 The Persian monarchs had
      extended their western conquests to the banks of the Danube, and
      the limits of European Scythia. The eastern provinces of their
      empire were exposed to the Scythians of Asia; the wild
      inhabitants of the plains beyond the Oxus and the Jaxartes, two
      mighty rivers, which direct their course towards the Caspian Sea.
      The long and memorable quarrel of Iran and Touran is still the
      theme of history or romance: the famous, perhaps the fabulous,
      valor of the Persian heroes, Rustan and Asfendiar, was
      signalized, in the defence of their country, against the
      Afrasiabs of the North; 20 and the invincible spirit of the same
      Barbarians resisted, on the same ground, the victorious arms of
      Cyrus and Alexander. 21 In the eyes of the Greeks and Persians,
      the real geography of Scythia was bounded, on the East, by the
      mountains of Imaus, or Caf; and their distant prospect of the
      extreme and inaccessible parts of Asia was clouded by ignorance,
      or perplexed by fiction. But those inaccessible regions are the
      ancient residence of a powerful and civilized nation, 22 which
      ascends, by a probable tradition, above forty centuries; 23 and
      which is able to verify a series of near two thousand years, by
      the perpetual testimony of accurate and contemporary historians.
      24 The annals of China 25 illustrate the state and revolutions of
      the pastoral tribes, which may still be distinguished by the
      vague appellation of Scythians, or Tartars; the vassals, the
      enemies, and sometimes the conquerors, of a great empire; whose
      policy has uniformly opposed the blind and impetuous valor of the
      Barbarians of the North. From the mouth of the Danube to the Sea
      of Japan, the whole longitude of Scythia is about one hundred and
      ten degrees, which, in that parallel, are equal to more than five
      thousand miles. The latitude of these extensive deserts cannot be
      so easily, or so accurately, measured; but, from the fortieth
      degree, which touches the wall of China, we may securely advance
      above a thousand miles to the northward, till our progress is
      stopped by the excessive cold of Siberia. In that dreary climate,
      instead of the animated picture of a Tartar camp, the smoke that
      issues from the earth, or rather from the snow, betrays the
      subterraneous dwellings of the Tongouses, and the Samoides: the
      want of horses and oxen is imperfectly supplied by the use of
      reindeer, and of large dogs; and the conquerors of the earth
      insensibly degenerate into a race of deformed and diminutive
      savages, who tremble at the sound of arms. 26

      16 (return) [ Abulghasi Khan, in the two first parts of his
      Genealogical History, relates the miserable tales and traditions
      of the Uzbek Tartars concerning the times which preceded the
      reign of Zingis. * Note: The differences between the various
      pastoral tribes and nations comprehended by the ancients under
      the vague name of Scythians, and by Gibbon under inst of Tartars,
      have received some, and still, perhaps, may receive more, light
      from the comparisons of their dialects and languages by modern
      scholars.ÑM]

      17 (return) [ In the thirteenth book of the Iliad, Jupiter turns
      away his eyes from the bloody fields of Troy, to the plains of
      Thrace and Scythia. He would not, by changing the prospect,
      behold a more peaceful or innocent scene.]

      18 (return) [ Thucydides, l. ii. c. 97.]

      19 (return) [ See the fourth book of Herodotus. When Darius
      advanced into the Moldavian desert, between the Danube and the
      Niester, the king of the Scythians sent him a mouse, a frog, a
      bird, and five arrows; a tremendous allegory!]

      20 (return) [ These wars and heroes may be found under their
      respective _titles_, in the Bibliothque Orientale of DÕHerbelot.
      They have been celebrated in an epic poem of sixty thousand
      rhymed couplets, by Ferdusi, the Homer of Persia. See the history
      of Nadir Shah, p. 145, 165. The public must lament that Mr. Jones
      has suspended the pursuit of Oriental learning. Note: Ferdusi is
      yet imperfectly known to European readers. An abstract of the
      whole poem has been published by Goerres in German, under the
      title Òdas Heldenbuch des Iran.Ó In English, an abstract with
      poetical translations, by Mr. Atkinson, has appeared, under the
      auspices of the Oriental Fund. But to translate a poet a man must
      be a poet. The best account of the poem is in an article by Von
      Hammer in the Vienna Jahrbucher, 1820: or perhaps in a masterly
      article in CochraneÕs Foreign Quarterly Review, No. 1, 1835. A
      splendid and critical edition of the whole work has been
      published by a very learned English Orientalist, Captain Macan,
      at the expense of the king of Oude. As to the number of 60,000
      couplets, Captain Macan (Preface, p. 39) states that he never saw
      a MS. containing more than 56,685, including doubtful and
      spurious passages and episodes.ÑM. * Note: The later studies of
      Sir W. Jones were more in unison with the wishes of the public,
      thus expressed by Gibbon.ÑM.]

      21 (return) [ The Caspian Sea, with its rivers and adjacent
      tribes, are laboriously illustrated in the Examen Critique des
      Historiens dÕAlexandre, which compares the true geography, and
      the errors produced by the vanity or ignorance of the Greeks.]

      22 (return) [ The original seat of the nation appears to have
      been in the Northwest of China, in the provinces of Chensi and
      Chansi. Under the two first dynasties, the principal town was
      still a movable camp; the villages were thinly scattered; more
      land was employed in pasture than in tillage; the exercise of
      hunting was ordained to clear the country from wild beasts;
      Petcheli (where Pekin stands) was a desert, and the Southern
      provinces were peopled with Indian savages. The dynasty of the
      _Han_ (before Christ 206) gave the empire its actual form and
      extent.]

      23 (return) [ The ¾ra of the Chinese monarchy has been variously
      fixed from 2952 to 2132 years before Christ; and the year 2637
      has been chosen for the lawful epoch, by the authority of the
      present emperor. The difference arises from the uncertain
      duration of the two first dynasties; and the vacant space that
      lies beyond them, as far as the real, or fabulous, times of Fohi,
      or Hoangti. Sematsien dates his authentic chronology from the
      year 841; the thirty-six eclipses of Confucius (thirty-one of
      which have been verified) were observed between the years 722 and
      480 before Christ. The _historical_ period of China does not
      ascend above the Greek Olympiads.]

      24 (return) [ After several ages of anarchy and despotism, the
      dynasty of the Han (before Christ 206) was the ¾ra of the revival
      of learning. The fragments of ancient literature were restored;
      the characters were improved and fixed; and the future
      preservation of books was secured by the useful inventions of
      ink, paper, and the art of printing. Ninety-seven years before
      Christ, Sematsien published the first history of China. His
      labors were illustrated, and continued, by a series of one
      hundred and eighty historians. The substance of their works is
      still extant; and the most considerable of them are now deposited
      in the king of FranceÕs library.]

      25 (return) [ China has been illustrated by the labors of the
      French; of the missionaries at Pekin, and Messrs. Freret and De
      Guignes at Paris. The substance of the three preceding notes is
      extracted from the Chou-king, with the preface and notes of M. de
      Guignes, Paris, 1770. The _Tong-Kien-Kang-Mou_, translated by P.
      de Mailla, under the name of Hist. GŽnerale de la Chine, tom. i.
      p. xlix.Ñcc.; the MŽmoires sur la Chine, Paris, 1776, &c., tom.
      i. p. 1Ñ323; tom. ii. p. 5Ñ364; the Histoire des Huns, tom. i. p.
      4Ñ131, tom. v. p. 345Ñ362; and the MŽmoires de lÕAcadŽmie des
      Inscriptions, tom. x. p. 377Ñ402; tom. xv. p. 495Ñ564; tom.
      xviii. p. 178Ñ295; xxxvi. p. 164Ñ238.]

      26 (return) [ See the Histoire Generale des Voyages, tom. xviii.,
      and the Genealogical History, vol. ii. p. 620Ñ664.]




      Chapter XXVI: Progress of The Huns.ÑPart II.


      The Huns, who under the reign of Valens threatened the empire of
      Rome, had been formidable, in a much earlier period, to the
      empire of China. 27 Their ancient, perhaps their original, seat
      was an extensive, though dry and barren, tract of country,
      immediately on the north side of the great wall. Their place is
      at present occupied by the forty-nine Hords or Banners of the
      Mongous, a pastoral nation, which consists of about two hundred
      thousand families. 28 But the valor of the Huns had extended the
      narrow limits of their dominions; and their rustic chiefs, who
      assumed the appellation of _Tanjou_, gradually became the
      conquerors, and the sovereigns of a formidable empire. Towards
      the East, their victorious arms were stopped only by the ocean;
      and the tribes, which are thinly scattered between the Amoor and
      the extreme peninsula of Corea, adhered, with reluctance, to the
      standard of the Huns. On the West, near the head of the Irtish,
      in the valleys of Imaus, they found a more ample space, and more
      numerous enemies. One of the lieutenants of the Tanjou subdued,
      in a single expedition, twenty-six nations; the Igours, 29
      distinguished above the Tartar race by the use of letters, were
      in the number of his vassals; and, by the strange connection of
      human events, the flight of one of those vagrant tribes recalled
      the victorious Parthians from the invasion of Syria. 30 On the
      side of the North, the ocean was assigned as the limit of the
      power of the Huns. Without enemies to resist their progress, or
      witnesses to contradict their vanity, they might securely achieve
      a real, or imaginary, conquest of the frozen regions of Siberia.
      The _Northern Sea_ was fixed as the remote boundary of their
      empire. But the name of that sea, on whose shores the patriot
      Sovou embraced the life of a shepherd and an exile, 31 may be
      transferred, with much more probability, to the Baikal, a
      capacious basin, above three hundred miles in length, which
      disdains the modest appellation of a lake 32 and which actually
      communicates with the seas of the North, by the long course of
      the Angara, the Tongusha, and the Jenissea. The submission of so
      many distant nations might flatter the pride of the Tanjou; but
      the valor of the Huns could be rewarded only by the enjoyment of
      the wealth and luxury of the empire of the South. In the third
      century 3211 before the Christian ¾ra, a wall of fifteen hundred
      miles in length was constructed, to defend the frontiers of China
      against the inroads of the Huns; 33 but this stupendous work,
      which holds a conspicuous place in the map of the world, has
      never contributed to the safety of an unwarlike people. The
      cavalry of the Tanjou frequently consisted of two or three
      hundred thousand men, formidable by the matchless dexterity with
      which they managed their bows and their horses: by their hardy
      patience in supporting the inclemency of the weather; and by the
      incredible speed of their march, which was seldom checked by
      torrents, or precipices, by the deepest rivers, or by the most
      lofty mountains. They spread themselves at once over the face of
      the country; and their rapid impetuosity surprised, astonished,
      and disconcerted the grave and elaborate tactics of a Chinese
      army. The emperor Kaoti, 34 a soldier of fortune, whose personal
      merit had raised him to the throne, marched against the Huns with
      those veteran troops which had been trained in the civil wars of
      China. But he was soon surrounded by the Barbarians; and, after a
      siege of seven days, the monarch, hopeless of relief, was reduced
      to purchase his deliverance by an ignominious capitulation. The
      successors of Kaoti, whose lives were dedicated to the arts of
      peace, or the luxury of the palace, submitted to a more permanent
      disgrace. They too hastily confessed the insufficiency of arms
      and fortifications. They were too easily convinced, that while
      the blazing signals announced on every side the approach of the
      Huns, the Chinese troops, who slept with the helmet on their
      head, and the cuirass on their back, were destroyed by the
      incessant labor of ineffectual marches. 35 A regular payment of
      money, and silk, was stipulated as the condition of a temporary
      and precarious peace; and the wretched expedient of disguising a
      real tribute, under the names of a gift or subsidy, was practised
      by the emperors of China as well as by those of Rome. But there
      still remained a more disgraceful article of tribute, which
      violated the sacred feelings of humanity and nature. The
      hardships of the savage life, which destroy in their infancy the
      children who are born with a less healthy and robust
      constitution, introduced a remarkable disproportion between the
      numbers of the two sexes. The Tartars are an ugly and even
      deformed race; and while they consider their own women as the
      instruments of domestic labor, their desires, or rather their
      appetites, are directed to the enjoyment of more elegant beauty.
      A select band of the fairest maidens of China was annually
      devoted to the rude embraces of the Huns; 36 and the alliance of
      the haughty Tanjous was secured by their marriage with the
      genuine, or adopted, daughters of the Imperial family, which
      vainly attempted to escape the sacrilegious pollution. The
      situation of these unhappy victims is described in the verses of
      a Chinese princess, who laments that she had been condemned by
      her parents to a distant exile, under a Barbarian husband; who
      complains that sour milk was her only drink, raw flesh her only
      food, a tent her only palace; and who expresses, in a strain of
      pathetic simplicity, the natural wish, that she were transformed
      into a bird, to fly back to her dear country; the object of her
      tender and perpetual regret. 37

      27 (return) [ M. de Guignes (tom. ii. p. 1Ñ124) has given the
      original history of the ancient Hiong-nou, or Huns. The Chinese
      geography of their country (tom. i. part. p. lv.Ñlxiii.) seems to
      comprise a part of their conquests. * Note: The theory of De
      Guignes on the early history of the Huns is, in general, rejected
      by modern writers. De Guignes advanced no valid proof of the
      identity of the Hioung-nou of the Chinese writers with the Huns,
      except the similarity of name. Schlozer, (Allgemeine Nordische
      Geschichte, p. 252,) Klaproth, (Tableaux Historiques de lÕAsie,
      p. 246,) St. Martin, iv. 61, and A. Remusat, (Recherches sur les
      Langues Tartares, D. P. xlvi, and p. 328; though in the latter
      passage he considers the theory of De Guignes not absolutely
      disproved,) concur in considering the Huns as belonging to the
      Finnish stock, distinct from the Moguls the Mandscheus, and the
      Turks. The Hiong-nou, according to Klaproth, were Turks. The
      names of the Hunnish chiefs could not be pronounced by a Turk;
      and, according to the same author, the Hioung-nou, which is
      explained in Chinese as _detestable slaves_, as early as the year
      91 J. C., were dispersed by the Chinese, and assumed the name of
      Yue-po or Yue-pan. M. St. Martin does not consider it impossible
      that the appellation of Hioung-nou may have belonged to the Huns.
      But all agree in considering the Madjar or Magyar of modern
      Hungary the descendants of the Huns. Their language (compare
      Gibbon, c. lv. n. 22) is nearly related to the Lapponian and
      Vogoul. The noble forms of the modern Hungarians, so strongly
      contrasted with the hideous pictures which the fears and the
      hatred of the Romans give of the Huns, M. Klaproth accounts for
      by the intermingling with other races, Turkish and Slavonian. The
      present state of the question is thus stated in the last edition
      of Malte Brun, and a new and ingenious hypothesis suggested to
      resolve all the difficulties of the question.
          Were the Huns Finns? This obscure question has not been
          debated till very recently, and is yet very far from being
          decided. We are of opinion that it will be so hereafter in
          the same manner as that with regard to the Scythians. We
          shall trace in the portrait of Attila a dominant tribe or
          Mongols, or Kalmucks, with all the hereditary ugliness of
          that race; but in the mass of the Hunnish army and nation
          will be recognized the Chuni and the Ounni of the Greek
          Geography. the Kuns of the Hungarians, the European Huns, and
          a race in close relationship with the Flemish stock. Malte
          Brun, vi. p. 94. This theory is more fully and ably
          developed, p. 743. Whoever has seen the emperor of AustriaÕs
          Hungarian guard, will not readily admit their descent from
          the Huns described by Sidonius Appolinaris.ÑM]

      28 (return) [ See in Duhalde (tom. iv. p. 18Ñ65) a circumstantial
      description, with a correct map, of the country of the Mongous.]

      29 (return) [ The Igours, or Vigours, were divided into three
      branches; hunters, shepherds, and husbandmen; and the last class
      was despised by the two former. See Abulghazi, part ii. c. 7. *
      Note: On the Ouigour or Igour characters, see the work of M. A.
      Remusat, Sur les Langues Tartares. He conceives the Ouigour
      alphabet of sixteen letters to have been formed from the Syriac,
      and introduced by the Nestorian Christians.ÑCh. ii. M.]

      30 (return) [ MŽmoires de lÕAcadŽmie des Inscriptions, tom. xxv.
      p. 17Ñ33. The comprehensive view of M. de Guignes has compared
      these distant events.]

      31 (return) [ The fame of Sovou, or So-ou, his merit, and his
      singular adventurers, are still celebrated in China. See the
      Eloge de Moukden, p. 20, and notes, p. 241Ñ247; and MŽmoires sur
      la Chine, tom. iii. p. 317Ñ360.]

      32 (return) [ See Isbrand Ives in HarrisÕs Collection, vol. ii.
      p. 931; BellÕs Travels, vol. i. p. 247Ñ254; and Gmelin, in the
      Hist. Generale des Voyages, tom. xviii. 283Ñ329. They all remark
      the vulgar opinion that the _holy sea_ grows angry and
      tempestuous if any one presumes to call it a _lake_. This
      grammatical nicety often excites a dispute between the absurd
      superstition of the mariners and the absurd obstinacy of
      travellers.]

      3211 (return) [ 224 years before Christ. It was built by
      Chi-hoang-ti of the Dynasty Thsin. It is from twenty to
      twenty-five feet high. Ce monument, aussi gigantesque
      quÕimpuissant, arreterait bien les incursions de quelques
      Nomades; mais il nÕa jamais empŽchŽ les invasions des Turcs, des
      Mongols, et des Mandchous. Abe Remusat Rech. Asiat. 2d ser. vol.
      i. p. 58ÑM.]

      33 (return) [ The construction of the wall of China is mentioned
      by Duhalde (tom. ii. p. 45) and De Guignes, (tom. ii. p. 59.)]

      34 (return) [ See the life of Lieoupang, or Kaoti, in the Hist,
      de la Chine, published at Paris, 1777, &c., tom. i. p. 442Ñ522.
      This voluminous work is the translation (by the P. de Mailla) of
      the _Tong- Kien-Kang-Mou_, the celebrated abridgment of the great
      History of Semakouang (A.D. 1084) and his continuators.]

      35 (return) [ See a free and ample memorial, presented by a
      Mandarin to the emperor Venti, (before Christ 180Ñ157,) in
      Duhalde, (tom. ii. p. 412Ñ426,) from a collection of State papers
      marked with the red pencil by Kamhi himself, (p. 354Ñ612.)
      Another memorial from the minister of war (Kang-Mou, tom. ii. p
      555) supplies some curious circumstances of the manners of the
      Huns.]

      36 (return) [ A supply of women is mentioned as a customary
      article of treaty and tribute, (Hist. de la Conquete de la Chine,
      par les Tartares Mantcheoux, tom. i. p. 186, 187, with the note
      of the editor.)]

      37 (return) [ De Guignes, Hist. des Huns, tom. ii. p. 62.]

      The conquest of China has been twice achieved by the pastoral
      tribes of the North: the forces of the Huns were not inferior to
      those of the Moguls, or of the Mantcheoux; and their ambition
      might entertain the most sanguine hopes of success. But their
      pride was humbled, and their progress was checked, by the arms
      and policy of Vouti, 38 the fifth emperor of the powerful dynasty
      of the Han. In his long reign of fifty- four years, the
      Barbarians of the southern provinces submitted to the laws and
      manners of China; and the ancient limits of the monarchy were
      enlarged, from the great river of Kiang, to the port of Canton.
      Instead of confining himself to the timid operations of a
      defensive war, his lieutenants penetrated many hundred miles into
      the country of the Huns. In those boundless deserts, where it is
      impossible to form magazines, and difficult to transport a
      sufficient supply of provisions, the armies of Vouti were
      repeatedly exposed to intolerable hardships: and, of one hundred
      and forty thousand soldiers, who marched against the Barbarians,
      thirty thousand only returned in safety to the feet of their
      master. These losses, however, were compensated by splendid and
      decisive success. The Chinese generals improved the superiority
      which they derived from the temper of their arms, their chariots
      of war, and the service of their Tartar auxiliaries. The camp of
      the Tanjou was surprised in the midst of sleep and intemperance;
      and, though the monarch of the Huns bravely cut his way through
      the ranks of the enemy, he left above fifteen thousand of his
      subjects on the field of battle. Yet this signal victory, which
      was preceded and followed by many bloody engagements, contributed
      much less to the destruction of the power of the Huns than the
      effectual policy which was employed to detach the tributary
      nations from their obedience. Intimidated by the arms, or allured
      by the promises, of Vouti and his successors, the most
      considerable tribes, both of the East and of the West, disclaimed
      the authority of the Tanjou. While some acknowledged themselves
      the allies or vassals of the empire, they all became the
      implacable enemies of the Huns; and the numbers of that haughty
      people, as soon as they were reduced to their native strength,
      might, perhaps, have been contained within the walls of one of
      the great and populous cities of China. 39 The desertion of his
      subjects, and the perplexity of a civil war, at length compelled
      the Tanjou himself to renounce the dignity of an independent
      sovereign, and the freedom of a warlike and high-spirited nation.
      He was received at Sigan, the capital of the monarchy, by the
      troops, the mandarins, and the emperor himself, with all the
      honors that could adorn and disguise the triumph of Chinese
      vanity. 40 A magnificent palace was prepared for his reception;
      his place was assigned above all the princes of the royal family;
      and the patience of the Barbarian king was exhausted by the
      ceremonies of a banquet, which consisted of eight courses of
      meat, and of nine solemn pieces of music. But he performed, on
      his knees, the duty of a respectful homage to the emperor of
      China; pronounced, in his own name, and in the name of his
      successors, a perpetual oath of fidelity; and gratefully accepted
      a seal, which was bestowed as the emblem of his regal dependence.
      After this humiliating submission, the Tanjous sometimes departed
      from their allegiance and seized the favorable moments of war and
      rapine; but the monarchy of the Huns gradually declined, till it
      was broken, by civil dissension, into two hostile and separate
      kingdoms. One of the princes of the nation was urged, by fear and
      ambition, to retire towards the South with eight hords, which
      composed between forty and fifty thousand families. He obtained,
      with the title of Tanjou, a convenient territory on the verge of
      the Chinese provinces; and his constant attachment to the service
      of the empire was secured by weakness, and the desire of revenge.
      From the time of this fatal schism, the Huns of the North
      continued to languish about fifty years; till they were oppressed
      on every side by their foreign and domestic enemies. The proud
      inscription 41 of a column, erected on a lofty mountain,
      announced to posterity, that a Chinese army had marched seven
      hundred miles into the heart of their country. The Sienpi, 42 a
      tribe of Oriental Tartars, retaliated the injuries which they had
      formerly sustained; and the power of the Tanjous, after a reign
      of thirteen hundred years, was utterly destroyed before the end
      of the first century of the Christian ¾ra. 43

      38 (return) [ See the reign of the emperor Vouti, in the
      Kang-Mou, tom. iii. p. 1Ñ98. His various and inconsistent
      character seems to be impartially drawn.]

      39 (return) [ This expression is used in the memorial to the
      emperor Venti, (Duhalde, tom. ii. p. 411.) Without adopting the
      exaggerations of Marco Polo and Isaac Vossius, we may rationally
      allow for Pekin two millions of inhabitants. The cities of the
      South, which contain the manufactures of China, are still more
      populous.]

      40 (return) [ See the Kang-Mou, tom. iii. p. 150, and the
      subsequent events under the proper years. This memorable festival
      is celebrated in the Eloge de Moukden, and explained in a note by
      the P. Gaubil, p. 89, 90.]

      41 (return) [ This inscription was composed on the spot by
      Parkou, President of the Tribunal of History (Kang-Mou, tom. iii.
      p. 392.) Similar monuments have been discovered in many parts of
      Tartary, (Histoire des Huns, tom. ii. p. 122.)]

      42 (return) [ M. de Guignes (tom. i. p. 189) has inserted a short
      account of the Sienpi.]

      43 (return) [ The ¾ra of the Huns is placed, by the Chinese, 1210
      years before Christ. But the series of their kings does not
      commence till the year 230, (Hist. des Huns, tom. ii. p. 21,
      123.)]

      The fate of the vanquished Huns was diversified by the various
      influence of character and situation. 44 Above one hundred
      thousand persons, the poorest, indeed, and the most pusillanimous
      of the people, were contented to remain in their native country,
      to renounce their peculiar name and origin, and to mingle with
      the victorious nation of the Sienpi. Fifty-eight hords, about two
      hundred thousand men, ambitious of a more honorable servitude,
      retired towards the South; implored the protection of the
      emperors of China; and were permitted to inhabit, and to guard,
      the extreme frontiers of the province of Chansi and the territory
      of Ortous. But the most warlike and powerful tribes of the Huns
      maintained, in their adverse fortune, the undaunted spirit of
      their ancestors. The Western world was open to their valor; and
      they resolved, under the conduct of their hereditary chieftains,
      to conquer and subdue some remote country, which was still
      inaccessible to the arms of the Sienpi, and to the laws of China.
      45 The course of their emigration soon carried them beyond the
      mountains of Imaus, and the limits of the Chinese geography; but
      _we_ are able to distinguish the two great divisions of these
      formidable exiles, which directed their march towards the Oxus,
      and towards the Volga. The first of these colonies established
      their dominion in the fruitful and extensive plains of Sogdiana,
      on the eastern side of the Caspian; where they preserved the name
      of Huns, with the epithet of Euthalites, or Nepthalites. 4511
      Their manners were softened, and even their features were
      insensibly improved, by the mildness of the climate, and their
      long residence in a flourishing province, 46 which might still
      retain a faint impression of the arts of Greece. 47 The _white_
      Huns, a name which they derived from the change of their
      complexions, soon abandoned the pastoral life of Scythia. Gorgo,
      which, under the appellation of Carizme, has since enjoyed a
      temporary splendor, was the residence of the king, who exercised
      a legal authority over an obedient people. Their luxury was
      maintained by the labor of the Sogdians; and the only vestige of
      their ancient barbarism, was the custom which obliged all the
      companions, perhaps to the number of twenty, who had shared the
      liberality of a wealthy lord, to be buried alive in the same
      grave. 48 The vicinity of the Huns to the provinces of Persia,
      involved them in frequent and bloody contests with the power of
      that monarchy. But they respected, in peace, the faith of
      treaties; in war, the dictates of humanity; and their memorable
      victory over Peroses, or Firuz, displayed the moderation, as well
      as the valor, of the Barbarians. The _second_ division of their
      countrymen, the Huns, who gradually advanced towards the
      North-west, were exercised by the hardships of a colder climate,
      and a more laborious march. Necessity compelled them to exchange
      the silks of China for the furs of Siberia; the imperfect
      rudiments of civilized life were obliterated; and the native
      fierceness of the Huns was exasperated by their intercourse with
      the savage tribes, who were compared, with some propriety, to the
      wild beasts of the desert. Their independent spirit soon rejected
      the hereditary succession of the Tanjous; and while each horde
      was governed by its peculiar mursa, their tumultuary council
      directed the public measures of the whole nation. As late as the
      thirteenth century, their transient residence on the eastern
      banks of the Volga was attested by the name of Great Hungary. 49
      In the winter, they descended with their flocks and herds towards
      the mouth of that mighty river; and their summer excursions
      reached as high as the latitude of Saratoff, or perhaps the
      conflux of the Kama. Such at least were the recent limits of the
      black Calmucks, 50 who remained about a century under the
      protection of Russia; and who have since returned to their native
      seats on the frontiers of the Chinese empire. The march, and the
      return, of those wandering Tartars, whose united camp consists of
      fifty thousand tents or families, illustrate the distant
      emigrations of the ancient Huns. 51

      44 (return) [ The various accidents, the downfall, and the flight
      of the Huns, are related in the Kang-Mou, tom. iii. p. 88, 91,
      95, 139, &c. The small numbers of each horde may be due to their
      losses and divisions.]

      45 (return) [ M. de Guignes has skilfully traced the footsteps of
      the Huns through the vast deserts of Tartary, (tom. ii. p. 123,
      277, &c., 325, &c.)]

      4511 (return) [ The Armenian authors often mention this people
      under the name of Hepthal. St. Martin considers that the name of
      Nepthalites is an error of a copyist. St. Martin, iv. 254.ÑM.]

      46 (return) [ Mohammed, sultan of Carizme, reigned in Sogdiana
      when it was invaded (A.D. 1218) by Zingis and his moguls. The
      Oriental historians (see DÕHerbelot, Petit de la Croix, &c.,)
      celebrate the populous cities which he ruined, and the fruitful
      country which he desolated. In the next century, the same
      provinces of Chorasmia and Nawaralnahr were described by
      Abulfeda, (Hudson, Geograph. Minor. tom. iii.) Their actual
      misery may be seen in the Genealogical History of the Tartars, p.
      423Ñ469.]

      47 (return) [ Justin (xli. 6) has left a short abridgment of the
      Greek kings of Bactriana. To their industry I should ascribe the
      new and extraordinary trade, which transported the merchandises
      of India into Europe, by the Oxus, the Caspian, the Cyrus, the
      Phasis, and the Euxine. The other ways, both of the land and sea,
      were possessed by the Seleucides and the Ptolemies. (See lÕEsprit
      des Loix, l. xxi.)]

      48 (return) [ Procopius de Bell. Persico, l. i. c. 3, p. 9.]

      49 (return) [ In the thirteenth century, the monk Rubruquis (who
      traversed the immense plain of Kipzak, in his journey to the
      court of the Great Khan) observed the remarkable name of
      _Hungary_, with the traces of a common language and origin,
      (Hist. des Voyages, tom. vii. p. 269.)]

      50 (return) [ Bell, (vol. i. p. 29Ñ34,) and the editors of the
      Genealogical History, (p. 539,) have described the Calmucks of
      the Volga in the beginning of the present century.]

      51 (return) [ This great transmigration of 300,000 Calmucks, or
      Torgouts, happened in the year 1771. The original narrative of
      Kien-long, the reigning emperor of China, which was intended for
      the inscription of a column, has been translated by the
      missionaries of Pekin, (MŽmoires sur la Chine, tom. i. p.
      401Ñ418.) The emperor affects the smooth and specious language of
      the Son of Heaven, and the Father of his People.]

      It is impossible to fill the dark interval of time, which
      elapsed, after the Huns of the Volga were lost in the eyes of the
      Chinese, and before they showed themselves to those of the
      Romans. There is some reason, however, to apprehend, that the
      same force which had driven them from their native seats, still
      continued to impel their march towards the frontiers of Europe.
      The power of the Sienpi, their implacable enemies, which extended
      above three thousand miles from East to West, 52 must have
      gradually oppressed them by the weight and terror of a formidable
      neighborhood; and the flight of the tribes of Scythia would
      inevitably tend to increase the strength or to contract the
      territories, of the Huns. The harsh and obscure appellations of
      those tribes would offend the ear, without informing the
      understanding, of the reader; but I cannot suppress the very
      natural suspicion, _that_ the Huns of the North derived a
      considerable reenforcement from the ruin of the dynasty of the
      South, which, in the course of the third century, submitted to
      the dominion of China; _that_ the bravest warriors marched away
      in search of their free and adventurous countrymen; _and_ that,
      as they had been divided by prosperity, they were easily reunited
      by the common hardships of their adverse fortune. 53 The Huns,
      with their flocks and herds, their wives and children, their
      dependents and allies, were transported to the west of the Volga,
      and they boldly advanced to invade the country of the Alani, a
      pastoral people, who occupied, or wasted, an extensive tract of
      the deserts of Scythia. The plains between the Volga and the
      Tanais were covered with the tents of the Alani, but their name
      and manners were diffused over the wide extent of their
      conquests; and the painted tribes of the Agathyrsi and Geloni
      were confounded among their vassals. Towards the North, they
      penetrated into the frozen regions of Siberia, among the savages
      who were accustomed, in their rage or hunger, to the taste of
      human flesh; and their Southern inroads were pushed as far as the
      confines of Persia and India. The mixture of Samartic and German
      blood had contributed to improve the features of the Alani, 5311
      to whiten their swarthy complexions, and to tinge their hair with
      a yellowish cast, which is seldom found in the Tartar race. They
      were less deformed in their persons, less brutish in their
      manners, than the Huns; but they did not yield to those
      formidable Barbarians in their martial and independent spirit; in
      the love of freedom, which rejected even the use of domestic
      slaves; and in the love of arms, which considered war and rapine
      as the pleasure and the glory of mankind. A naked cimeter, fixed
      in the ground, was the only object of their religious worship;
      the scalps of their enemies formed the costly trappings of their
      horses; and they viewed, with pity and contempt, the
      pusillanimous warriors, who patiently expected the infirmities of
      age, and the tortures of lingering disease. 54 On the banks of
      the Tanais, the military power of the Huns and the Alani
      encountered each other with equal valor, but with unequal
      success. The Huns prevailed in the bloody contest; the king of
      the Alani was slain; and the remains of the vanquished nation
      were dispersed by the ordinary alternative of flight or
      submission. 55 A colony of exiles found a secure refuge in the
      mountains of Caucasus, between the Euxine and the Caspian, where
      they still preserve their name and their independence. Another
      colony advanced, with more intrepid courage, towards the shores
      of the Baltic; associated themselves with the Northern tribes of
      Germany; and shared the spoil of the Roman provinces of Gaul and
      Spain. But the greatest part of the nation of the Alani embraced
      the offers of an honorable and advantageous union; and the Huns,
      who esteemed the valor of their less fortunate enemies,
      proceeded, with an increase of numbers and confidence, to invade
      the limits of the Gothic empire.

      52 (return) [ The Khan-Mou (tom. iii. p. 447) ascribes to their
      conquests a space of 14,000 _lis_. According to the present
      standard, 200 _lis_ (or more accurately 193) are equal to one
      degree of latitude; and one English mile consequently exceeds
      three miles of China. But there are strong reasons to believe
      that the ancient _li_ scarcely equalled one half of the modern.
      See the elaborate researches of M. DÕAnville, a geographer who is
      not a stranger in any age or climate of the globe. (MŽmoires de
      lÕAcad. tom. ii. p. 125-502. Itineraires, p. 154-167.)]

      53 (return) [ See Histoire des Huns, tom. ii. p. 125Ñ144. The
      subsequent history (p. 145Ñ277) of three or four Hunnic dynasties
      evidently proves that their martial spirit was not impaired by a
      long residence in China.]

      5311 (return) [ Compare M. KlaprothÕs curious speculations on the
      Alani. He supposes them to have been the people, known by the
      Chinese, at the time of their first expeditions to the West,
      under the name of Yath-sai or A-lanna, the Alan‰n of Persian
      tradition, as preserved in Ferdusi; the same, according to
      Ammianus, with the Massaget¾, and with the Albani. The remains of
      the nation still exist in the Osset¾ of Mount Caucasus. Klaproth,
      Tableaux Historiques de lÕAsie, p. 174.ÑM. Compare Shafarik
      Slawische alterthŸmer, i. p. 350.ÑM. 1845.]

      54 (return) [ Utque hominibus quietis et placidis otium est
      voluptabile, ita illos pericula juvent et bella. Judicatur ibi
      beatus qui in prÏlio profuderit animam: senescentes etiam et
      fortuitis mortibus mundo digressos, ut degeneres et ignavos,
      conviciis atrocibus insectantur. [Ammian. xxxi. 11.] We must
      think highly of the conquerors of _such_ men.]

      55 (return) [ On the subject of the Alani, see Ammianus, (xxxi.
      2,) Jornandes, (de Rebus Geticis, c. 24,) M. de Guignes, (Hist.
      des Huns, tom. ii. p. 279,) and the Genealogical History of the
      Tartars, (tom. ii. p. 617.)]

      The great Hermanric, whose dominions extended from the Baltic to
      the Euxine, enjoyed, in the full maturity of age and reputation,
      the fruit of his victories, when he was alarmed by the formidable
      approach of a host of unknown enemies, 56 on whom his barbarous
      subjects might, without injustice, bestow the epithet of
      Barbarians. The numbers, the strength, the rapid motions, and the
      implacable cruelty of the Huns, were felt, and dreaded, and
      magnified, by the astonished Goths; who beheld their fields and
      villages consumed with flames, and deluged with indiscriminate
      slaughter. To these real terrors they added the surprise and
      abhorrence which were excited by the shrill voice, the uncouth
      gestures, and the strange deformity of the Huns. 5611 These
      savages of Scythia were compared (and the picture had some
      resemblance) to the animals who walk very awkwardly on two legs
      and to the misshapen figures, the _Termini_, which were often
      placed on the bridges of antiquity. They were distinguished from
      the rest of the human species by their broad shoulders, flat
      noses, and small black eyes, deeply buried in the head; and as
      they were almost destitute of beards, they never enjoyed either
      the manly grace of youth, or the venerable aspect of age. 57 A
      fabulous origin was assigned, worthy of their form and manners;
      that the witches of Scythia, who, for their foul and deadly
      practices, had been driven from society, had copulated in the
      desert with infernal spirits; and that the Huns were the
      offspring of this execrable conjunction. 58 The tale, so full of
      horror and absurdity, was greedily embraced by the credulous
      hatred of the Goths; but, while it gratified their hatred, it
      increased their fear, since the posterity of d¾mons and witches
      might be supposed to inherit some share of the pr¾ternatural
      powers, as well as of the malignant temper, of their parents.
      Against these enemies, Hermanric prepared to exert the united
      forces of the Gothic state; but he soon discovered that his
      vassal tribes, provoked by oppression, were much more inclined to
      second, than to repel, the invasion of the Huns. One of the
      chiefs of the Roxolani 59 had formerly deserted the standard of
      Hermanric, and the cruel tyrant had condemned the innocent wife
      of the traitor to be torn asunder by wild horses. The brothers of
      that unfortunate woman seized the favorable moment of revenge.

      The aged king of the Goths languished some time after the
      dangerous wound which he received from their daggers; but the
      conduct of the war was retarded by his infirmities; and the
      public councils of the nation were distracted by a spirit of
      jealousy and discord. His death, which has been imputed to his
      own despair, left the reins of government in the hands of
      Withimer, who, with the doubtful aid of some Scythian
      mercenaries, maintained the unequal contest against the arms of
      the Huns and the Alani, till he was defeated and slain in a
      decisive battle. The Ostrogoths submitted to their fate; and the
      royal race of the Amali will hereafter be found among the
      subjects of the haughty Attila. But the person of Witheric, the
      infant king, was saved by the diligence of Alatheus and Saphrax;
      two warriors of approved valor and fiedlity, who, by cautious
      marches, conducted the independent remains of the nation of the
      Ostrogoths towards the Danastus, or Niester; a considerable
      river, which now separates the Turkish dominions from the empire
      of Russia. On the banks of the Niester, the prudent Athanaric,
      more attentive to his own than to the general safety, had fixed
      the camp of the Visigoths; with the firm resolution of opposing
      the victorious Barbarians, whom he thought it less advisable to
      provoke. The ordinary speed of the Huns was checked by the weight
      of baggage, and the encumbrance of captives; but their military
      skill deceived, and almost destroyed, the army of Athanaric.
      While the Judge of the Visigoths defended the banks of the
      Niester, he was encompassed and attacked by a numerous detachment
      of cavalry, who, by the light of the moon, had passed the river
      in a fordable place; and it was not without the utmost efforts of
      courage and conduct, that he was able to effect his retreat
      towards the hilly country. The undaunted general had already
      formed a new and judicious plan of defensive war; and the strong
      lines, which he was preparing to construct between the mountains,
      the Pruth, and the Danube, would have secured the extensive and
      fertile territory that bears the modern name of Walachia, from
      the destructive inroads of the Huns. 60 But the hopes and
      measures of the Judge of the Visigoths was soon disappointed, by
      the trembling impatience of his dismayed countrymen; who were
      persuaded by their fears, that the interposition of the Danube
      was the only barrier that could save them from the rapid pursuit,
      and invincible valor, of the Barbarians of Scythia. Under the
      command of Fritigern and Alavivus, 61 the body of the nation
      hastily advanced to the banks of the great river, and implored
      the protection of the Roman emperor of the East. Athanaric
      himself, still anxious to avoid the guilt of perjury, retired,
      with a band of faithful followers, into the mountainous country
      of Caucaland; which appears to have been guarded, and almost
      concealed, by the impenetrable forests of Transylvania. 62 6211

      56 (return) [ As we are possessed of the authentic history of the
      Huns, it would be impertinent to repeat, or to refute, the fables
      which misrepresent their origin and progress, their passage of
      the mud or water of the M¾otis, in pursuit of an ox or stag, les
      Indes quÕils avoient dŽcouvertes, &c., (Zosimus, l. iv. p. 224.
      Sozomen, l. vi. c. 37. Procopius, Hist. Miscell. c. 5. Jornandes,
      c. 24. Grandeur et DŽcadence, &c., des Romains, c. 17.)]

      5611 (return) [ Art added to their native ugliness; in fact, it
      is difficult to ascribe the proper share in the features of this
      hideous picture to nature, to the barbarous skill with which they
      were self-disfigured, or to the terror and hatred of the Romans.
      Their noses were flattened by their nurses, their cheeks were
      gashed by an iron instrument, that the scars might look more
      fearful, and prevent the growth of the beard. Jornandes and
      Sidonius Apollinaris:Ñ

     Obtundit teneras circumdata fascia nares, Ut galeis cedant.

      Yet he adds that their forms were robust and manly, their height
      of a middle size, but, from the habit of riding, disproportioned.

     Stant pectora vasta, Insignes humer, succincta sub ilibus alvus.
     Forma quidem pediti media est, procera sed extat Si cernas
     equites, sic longi s¾pe putantur Si sedeant.]

      57 (return) [ Prodigios¾ form¾, et pandi; ut bipedes existimes
      bestias; vel quales in commarginandis pontibus, effigiati
      stipites dolantur incompte. Ammian. xxxi. i. Jornandes (c. 24)
      draws a strong caricature of a Calmuck face. Species pavenda
      nigredine... qu¾dam deformis offa, non fecies; habensque magis
      puncta quam lumina. See Buffon. Hist. Naturelle, tom. iii. 380.]

      58 (return) [ This execrable origin, which Jornandes (c. 24)
      describes with the rancor of a Goth, might be originally derived
      from a more pleasing fable of the Greeks. (Herodot. l. iv. c. 9,
      &c.)]

      59 (return) [ The Roxolani may be the fathers of the the
      _Russians_, (DÕAnville, Empire de Russie, p. 1Ñ10,) whose
      residence (A.D. 862) about Novogrod Veliki cannot be very remote
      from that which the Geographer of Ravenna (i. 12, iv. 4, 46, v.
      28, 30) assigns to the Roxolani, (A.D. 886.) * Note: See, on the
      origin of the Russ, Schlozer, Nordische Geschichte, p. 78ÑM.]

      60 (return) [ The text of Ammianus seems to be imperfect or
      corrupt; but the nature of the ground explains, and almost
      defines, the Gothic rampart. MŽmoires de lÕAcadŽmie, &c., tom.
      xxviii. p. 444Ñ462.]

      61 (return) [ M. de Buat (Hist. des Peuples de lÕEurope, tom. vi.
      p. 407) has conceived a strange idea, that Alavivus was the same
      person as Ulphilas, the Gothic bishop; and that Ulphilas, the
      grandson of a Cappadocian captive, became a temporal prince of
      the Goths.]

      62 (return) [ Ammianus (xxxi. 3) and Jornandes (de Rebus Geticis,
      c. 24) describe the subversion of the Gothic empire by the Huns.]

      6211 (return) [ The most probable opinion as to the position of
      this land is that of M. Malte-Brun. He thinks that Caucaland is
      the territory of the Cacoenses, placed by Ptolemy (l. iii. c. 8)
      towards the Carpathian Mountains, on the side of the present
      Transylvania, and therefore the canton of Cacava, to the south of
      Hermanstadt, the capital of the principality. Caucaland it is
      evident, is the Gothic form of these different names. St. Martin,
      iv 103.ÑM.]




      Chapter XXVI: Progress of The Huns.ÑPart III.


      After Valens had terminated the Gothic war with some appearance
      of glory and success, he made a progress through his dominions of
      Asia, and at length fixed his residence in the capital of Syria.
      The five years 63 which he spent at Antioch was employed to
      watch, from a secure distance, the hostile designs of the Persian
      monarch; to check the depredations of the Saracens and Isaurians;
      64 to enforce, by arguments more prevalent than those of reason
      and eloquence, the belief of the Arian theology; and to satisfy
      his anxious suspicions by the promiscuous execution of the
      innocent and the guilty. But the attention of the emperor was
      most seriously engaged, by the important intelligence which he
      received from the civil and military officers who were intrusted
      with the defence of the Danube. He was informed, that the North
      was agitated by a furious tempest; that the irruption of the
      Huns, an unknown and monstrous race of savages, had subverted the
      power of the Goths; and that the suppliant multitudes of that
      warlike nation, whose pride was now humbled in the dust, covered
      a space of many miles along the banks of the river. With
      outstretched arms, and pathetic lamentations, they loudly
      deplored their past misfortunes and their present danger;
      acknowledged that their only hope of safety was in the clemency
      of the Roman government; and most solemnly protested, that if the
      gracious liberality of the emperor would permit them to cultivate
      the waste lands of Thrace, they should ever hold themselves
      bound, by the strongest obligations of duty and gratitude, to
      obey the laws, and to guard the limits, of the republic. These
      assurances were confirmed by the ambassadors of the Goths, 6411
      who impatiently expected from the mouth of Valens an answer that
      must finally determine the fate of their unhappy countrymen. The
      emperor of the East was no longer guided by the wisdom and
      authority of his elder brother, whose death happened towards the
      end of the preceding year; and as the distressful situation of
      the Goths required an instant and peremptory decision, he was
      deprived of the favorite resources of feeble and timid minds, who
      consider the use of dilatory and ambiguous measures as the most
      admirable efforts of consummate prudence. As long as the same
      passions and interests subsist among mankind, the questions of
      war and peace, of justice and policy, which were debated in the
      councils of antiquity, will frequently present themselves as the
      subject of modern deliberation. But the most experienced
      statesman of Europe has never been summoned to consider the
      propriety, or the danger, of admitting, or rejecting, an
      innumerable multitude of Barbarians, who are driven by despair
      and hunger to solicit a settlement on the territories of a
      civilized nation. When that important proposition, so essentially
      connected with the public safety, was referred to the ministers
      of Valens, they were perplexed and divided; but they soon
      acquiesced in the flattering sentiment which seemed the most
      favorable to the pride, the indolence, and the avarice of their
      sovereign. The slaves, who were decorated with the titles of
      pr¾fects and generals, dissembled or disregarded the terrors of
      this national emigration; so extremely different from the partial
      and accidental colonies, which had been received on the extreme
      limits of the empire. But they applauded the liberality of
      fortune, which had conducted, from the most distant countries of
      the globe, a numerous and invincible army of strangers, to defend
      the throne of Valens; who might now add to the royal treasures
      the immense sums of gold supplied by the provincials to
      compensate their annual proportion of recruits. The prayers of
      the Goths were granted, and their service was accepted by the
      Imperial court: and orders were immediately despatched to the
      civil and military governors of the Thracian diocese, to make the
      necessary preparations for the passage and subsistence of a great
      people, till a proper and sufficient territory could be allotted
      for their future residence. The liberality of the emperor was
      accompanied, however, with two harsh and rigorous conditions,
      which prudence might justify on the side of the Romans; but which
      distress alone could extort from the indignant Goths. Before they
      passed the Danube, they were required to deliver their arms: and
      it was insisted, that their children should be taken from them,
      and dispersed through the provinces of Asia; where they might be
      civilized by the arts of education, and serve as hostages to
      secure the fidelity of their parents.

      63 (return) [ The Chronology of Ammianus is obscure and
      imperfect. Tillemont has labored to clear and settle the annals
      of Valens.]

      64 (return) [ Zosimus, l. iv. p. 223. Sozomen, l. vi. c. 38. The
      Isaurians, each winter, infested the roads of Asia Minor, as far
      as the neighborhood of Constantinople. Basil, Epist. cel. apud
      Tillemont, Hist. des Empereurs, tom. v. p. 106.]

      6411 (return) [ Sozomen and Philostorgius say that the bishop
      Ulphilas was one of these ambassadors.ÑM.]

      During the suspense of a doubtful and distant negotiation, the
      impatient Goths made some rash attempts to pass the Danube,
      without the permission of the government, whose protection they
      had implored. Their motions were strictly observed by the
      vigilance of the troops which were stationed along the river and
      their foremost detachments were defeated with considerable
      slaughter; yet such were the timid councils of the reign of
      Valens, that the brave officers who had served their country in
      the execution of their duty, were punished by the loss of their
      employments, and narrowly escaped the loss of their heads. The
      Imperial mandate was at length received for transporting over the
      Danube the whole body of the Gothic nation; 65 but the execution
      of this order was a task of labor and difficulty. The stream of
      the Danube, which in those parts is above a mile broad, 66 had
      been swelled by incessant rains; and in this tumultuous passage,
      many were swept away, and drowned, by the rapid violence of the
      current. A large fleet of vessels, of boats, and of canoes, was
      provided; many days and nights they passed and repassed with
      indefatigable toil; and the most strenuous diligence was exerted
      by the officers of Valens, that not a single Barbarian, of those
      who were reserved to subvert the foundations of Rome, should be
      left on the opposite shore. It was thought expedient that an
      accurate account should be taken of their numbers; but the
      persons who were employed soon desisted, with amazement and
      dismay, from the prosecution of the endless and impracticable
      task: 67 and the principal historian of the age most seriously
      affirms, that the prodigious armies of Darius and Xerxes, which
      had so long been considered as the fables of vain and credulous
      antiquity, were now justified, in the eyes of mankind, by the
      evidence of fact and experience. A probable testimony has fixed
      the number of the Gothic warriors at two hundred thousand men:
      and if we can venture to add the just proportion of women, of
      children, and of slaves, the whole mass of people which composed
      this formidable emigration, must have amounted to near a million
      of persons, of both sexes, and of all ages. The children of the
      Goths, those at least of a distinguished rank, were separated
      from the multitude. They were conducted, without delay, to the
      distant seats assigned for their residence and education; and as
      the numerous train of hostages or captives passed through the
      cities, their gay and splendid apparel, their robust and martial
      figure, excited the surprise and envy of the Provincials. 6711
      But the stipulation, the most offensive to the Goths, and the
      most important to the Romans, was shamefully eluded. The
      Barbarians, who considered their arms as the ensigns of honor and
      the pledges of safety, were disposed to offer a price, which the
      lust or avarice of the Imperial officers was easily tempted to
      accept. To preserve their arms, the haughty warriors consented,
      with some reluctance, to prostitute their wives or their
      daughters; the charms of a beauteous maid, or a comely boy,
      secured the connivance of the inspectors; who sometimes cast an
      eye of covetousness on the fringed carpets and linen garments of
      their new allies, 68 or who sacrificed their duty to the mean
      consideration of filling their farms with cattle, and their
      houses with slaves. The Goths, with arms in their hands, were
      permitted to enter the boats; and when their strength was
      collected on the other side of the river, the immense camp which
      was spread over the plains and the hills of the Lower M¾sia,
      assumed a threatening and even hostile aspect. The leaders of the
      Ostrogoths, Alatheus and Saphrax, the guardians of their infant
      king, appeared soon afterwards on the Northern banks of the
      Danube; and immediately despatched their ambassadors to the court
      of Antioch, to solicit, with the same professions of allegiance
      and gratitude, the same favor which had been granted to the
      suppliant Visigoths. The absolute refusal of Valens suspended
      their progress, and discovered the repentance, the suspicions,
      and the fears, of the Imperial council.

      65 (return) [ The passage of the Danube is exposed by Ammianus,
      (xxxi. 3, 4,) Zosimus, (l. iv. p. 223, 224,) Eunapius in Excerpt.
      Legat. (p. 19, 20,) and Jornandes, (c. 25, 26.) Ammianus declares
      (c. 5) that he means only, ispas rerum digerere _summitates_. But
      he often takes a false measure of their importance; and his
      superfluous prolixity is disagreeably balanced by his
      unseasonable brevity.]

      66 (return) [ Chishull, a curious traveller, has remarked the
      breadth of the Danube, which he passed to the south of Bucharest
      near the conflux of the Argish, (p. 77.) He admires the beauty
      and spontaneous plenty of M¾sia, or Bulgaria.]

      67 (return) [

     Quem sci scire velit, Libyci velit ¾quoris idem Discere quam mult¾
     Zephyro turbentur haren¾.

      Ammianus has inserted, in his prose, these lines of Virgil,
      (Georgia l. ii. 105,) originally designed by the poet to express
      the impossibility of numbering the different sorts of vines. See
      Plin. Hist. Natur l. xiv.]

      6711 (return) [ A very curious, but obscure, passage of Eunapius,
      appears to me to have been misunderstood by M. Mai, to whom we
      owe its discovery. The substance is as follows: ÒThe Goths
      transported over the river their native deities, with their
      priests of both sexes; but concerning their rites they maintained
      a deep and Ô_adamantine_ silence.Õ To the Romans they pretended
      to be generally Christians, and placed certain persons to
      represent bishops in a conspicuous manner on their wagons. There
      was even among them a sort of what are called monks, persons whom
      it was not difficult to mimic; it was enough to wear black
      raiment, to be wicked, and held in respect.Ó (Eunapius hated the
      Òblack-robed monks,Ó as appears in another passage, with the
      cordial detestation of a heathen philosopher.) ÒThus, while they
      faithfully but secretly adhered to their own religion, the Romans
      were weak enough to suppose them perfect Christians.Ó Mai, 277.
      Eunapius in Niebuhr, 82.ÑM]

      68 (return) [ Eunapius and Zosimus curiously specify these
      articles of Gothic wealth and luxury. Yet it must be presumed,
      that they were the manufactures of the provinces; which the
      Barbarians had acquired as the spoils of war; or as the gifts, or
      merchandise, of peace.]

      An undisciplined and unsettled nation of Barbarians required the
      firmest temper, and the most dexterous management. The daily
      subsistence of near a million of extraordinary subjects could be
      supplied only by constant and skilful diligence, and might
      continually be interrupted by mistake or accident. The insolence,
      or the indignation, of the Goths, if they conceived themselves to
      be the objects either of fear or of contempt, might urge them to
      the most desperate extremities; and the fortune of the state
      seemed to depend on the prudence, as well as the integrity, of
      the generals of Valens. At this important crisis, the military
      government of Thrace was exercised by Lupicinus and Maximus, in
      whose venal minds the slightest hope of private emolument
      outweighed every consideration of public advantage; and whose
      guilt was only alleviated by their incapacity of discerning the
      pernicious effects of their rash and criminal administration.

      Instead of obeying the orders of their sovereign, and satisfying,
      with decent liberality, the demands of the Goths, they levied an
      ungenerous and oppressive tax on the wants of the hungry
      Barbarians. The vilest food was sold at an extravagant price;
      and, in the room of wholesome and substantial provisions, the
      markets were filled with the flesh of dogs, and of unclean
      animals, who had died of disease. To obtain the valuable
      acquisition of a pound of bread, the Goths resigned the
      possession of an expensive, though serviceable, slave; and a
      small quantity of meat was greedily purchased with ten pounds of
      a precious, but useless metal, 69 when their property was
      exhausted, they continued this necessary traffic by the sale of
      their sons and daughters; and notwithstanding the love of
      freedom, which animated every Gothic breast, they submitted to
      the humiliating maxim, that it was better for their children to
      be maintained in a servile condition, than to perish in a state
      of wretched and helpless independence. The most lively resentment
      is excited by the tyranny of pretended benefactors, who sternly
      exact the debt of gratitude which they have cancelled by
      subsequent injuries: a spirit of discontent insensibly arose in
      the camp of the Barbarians, who pleaded, without success, the
      merit of their patient and dutiful behavior; and loudly
      complained of the inhospitable treatment which they had received
      from their new allies. They beheld around them the wealth and
      plenty of a fertile province, in the midst of which they suffered
      the intolerable hardships of artificial famine. But the means of
      relief, and even of revenge, were in their hands; since the
      rapaciousness of their tyrants had left to an injured people the
      possession and the use of arms. The clamors of a multitude,
      untaught to disguise their sentiments, announced the first
      symptoms of resistance, and alarmed the timid and guilty minds of
      Lupicinus and Maximus. Those crafty ministers, who substituted
      the cunning of temporary expedients to the wise and salutary
      counsels of general policy, attempted to remove the Goths from
      their dangerous station on the frontiers of the empire; and to
      disperse them, in separate quarters of cantonment, through the
      interior provinces. As they were conscious how ill they had
      deserved the respect, or confidence, of the Barbarians, they
      diligently collected, from every side, a military force, that
      might urge the tardy and reluctant march of a people, who had not
      yet renounced the title, or the duties, of Roman subjects. But
      the generals of Valens, while their attention was solely directed
      to the discontented Visigoths, imprudently disarmed the ships and
      the fortifications which constituted the defence of the Danube.
      The fatal oversight was observed, and improved, by Alatheus and
      Saphrax, who anxiously watched the favorable moment of escaping
      from the pursuit of the Huns. By the help of such rafts and
      vessels as could be hastily procured, the leaders of the
      Ostrogoths transported, without opposition, their king and their
      army; and boldly fixed a hostile and independent camp on the
      territories of the empire. 70

      69 (return) [ _Decem libras;_ the word _silver_ must be
      understood. Jornandes betrays the passions and prejudices of a
      Goth. The servile Geeks, Eunapius and Zosimus, disguise the Roman
      oppression, and execrate the perfidy of the Barbarians. Ammianus,
      a patriot historian, slightly, and reluctantly, touches on the
      odious subject. Jerom, who wrote almost on the spot, is fair,
      though concise. Per avaritaim aximi ducis, ad rebellionem fame
      _coacti_ sunt, (in Chron.) * Note: A new passage from the history
      of Eunapius is nearer to the truth. ÔIt appeared to our
      commanders a legitimate source of gain to be bribed by the
      Barbarians: Edit. Niebuhr, p. 82.ÑM.]

      70 (return) [ Ammianus, xxxi. 4, 5.]

      Under the name of Judges, Alavivus and Fritigern were the leaders
      of the Visigoths in peace and war; and the authority which they
      derived from their birth was ratified by the free consent of the
      nation. In a season of tranquility, their power might have been
      equal, as well as their rank; but, as soon as their countrymen
      were exasperated by hunger and oppression, the superior abilities
      of Fritigern assumed the military command, which he was qualified
      to exercise for the public welfare. He restrained the impatient
      spirit of the Visigoths till the injuries and the insults of
      their tyrants should justify their resistance in the opinion of
      mankind: but he was not disposed to sacrifice any solid
      advantages for the empty praise of justice and moderation.
      Sensible of the benefits which would result from the union of the
      Gothic powers under the same standard, he secretly cultivated the
      friendship of the Ostrogoths; and while he professed an implicit
      obedience to the orders of the Roman generals, he proceeded by
      slow marches towards Marcianopolis, the capital of the Lower
      M¾sia, about seventy miles from the banks of the Danube. On that
      fatal spot, the flames of discord and mutual hatred burst forth
      into a dreadful conflagration. Lupicinus had invited the Gothic
      chiefs to a splendid entertainment; and their martial train
      remained under arms at the entrance of the palace. But the gates
      of the city were strictly guarded, and the Barbarians were
      sternly excluded from the use of a plentiful market, to which
      they asserted their equal claim of subjects and allies. Their
      humble prayers were rejected with insolence and derision; and as
      their patience was now exhausted, the townsmen, the soldiers, and
      the Goths, were soon involved in a conflict of passionate
      altercation and angry reproaches. A blow was imprudently given; a
      sword was hastily drawn; and the first blood that was spilt in
      this accidental quarrel, became the signal of a long and
      destructive war. In the midst of noise and brutal intemperance,
      Lupicinus was informed, by a secret messenger, that many of his
      soldiers were slain, and despoiled of their arms; and as he was
      already inflamed by wine, and oppressed by sleep he issued a rash
      command, that their death should be revenged by the massacre of
      the guards of Fritigern and Alavivus.

      The clamorous shouts and dying groans apprised Fritigern of his
      extreme danger; and, as he possessed the calm and intrepid spirit
      of a hero, he saw that he was lost if he allowed a moment of
      deliberation to the man who had so deeply injured him. ÒA
      trifling dispute,Ó said the Gothic leader, with a firm but gentle
      tone of voice, Òappears to have arisen between the two nations;
      but it may be productive of the most dangerous consequences,
      unless the tumult is immediately pacified by the assurance of our
      safety, and the authority of our presence.Ó At these words,
      Fritigern and his companions drew their swords, opened their
      passage through the unresisting crowd, which filled the palace,
      the streets, and the gates, of Marcianopolis, and, mounting their
      horses, hastily vanished from the eyes of the astonished Romans.
      The generals of the Goths were saluted by the fierce and joyful
      acclamations of the camp; war was instantly resolved, and the
      resolution was executed without delay: the banners of the nation
      were displayed according to the custom of their ancestors; and
      the air resounded with the harsh and mournful music of the
      Barbarian trumpet. 71 The weak and guilty Lupicinus, who had
      dared to provoke, who had neglected to destroy, and who still
      presumed to despise, his formidable enemy, marched against the
      Goths, at the head of such a military force as could be collected
      on this sudden emergency. The Barbarians expected his approach
      about nine miles from Marcianopolis; and on this occasion the
      talents of the general were found to be of more prevailing
      efficacy than the weapons and discipline of the troops. The valor
      of the Goths was so ably directed by the genius of Fritigern,
      that they broke, by a close and vigorous attack, the ranks of the
      Roman legions. Lupicinus left his arms and standards, his
      tribunes and his bravest soldiers, on the field of battle; and
      their useless courage served only to protect the ignominious
      flight of their leader. ÒThat successful day put an end to the
      distress of the Barbarians, and the security of the Romans: from
      that day, the Goths, renouncing the precarious condition of
      strangers and exiles, assumed the character of citizens and
      masters, claimed an absolute dominion over the possessors of
      land, and held, in their own right, the northern provinces of the
      empire, which are bounded by the Danube.Ó Such are the words of
      the Gothic historian, 72 who celebrates, with rude eloquence, the
      glory of his countrymen. But the dominion of the Barbarians was
      exercised only for the purposes of rapine and destruction. As
      they had been deprived, by the ministers of the emperor, of the
      common benefits of nature, and the fair intercourse of social
      life, they retaliated the injustice on the subjects of the
      empire; and the crimes of Lupicinus were expiated by the ruin of
      the peaceful husbandmen of Thrace, the conflagration of their
      villages, and the massacre, or captivity, of their innocent
      families. The report of the Gothic victory was soon diffused over
      the adjacent country; and while it filled the minds of the Romans
      with terror and dismay, their own hasty imprudence contributed to
      increase the forces of Fritigern, and the calamities of the
      province. Some time before the great emigration, a numerous body
      of Goths, under the command of Suerid and Colias, had been
      received into the protection and service of the empire. 73 They
      were encamped under the walls of Hadrianople; but the ministers
      of Valens were anxious to remove them beyond the Hellespont, at a
      distance from the dangerous temptation which might so easily be
      communicated by the neighborhood, and the success, of their
      countrymen. The respectful submission with which they yielded to
      the order of their march, might be considered as a proof of their
      fidelity; and their moderate request of a sufficient allowance of
      provisions, and of a delay of only two days was expressed in the
      most dutiful terms. But the first magistrate of Hadrianople,
      incensed by some disorders which had been committed at his
      country-house, refused this indulgence; and arming against them
      the inhabitants and manufacturers of a populous city, he urged,
      with hostile threats, their instant departure. The Barbarians
      stood silent and amazed, till they were exasperated by the
      insulting clamors, and missile weapons, of the populace: but when
      patience or contempt was fatigued, they crushed the undisciplined
      multitude, inflicted many a shameful wound on the backs of their
      flying enemies, and despoiled them of the splendid armor, 74
      which they were unworthy to bear. The resemblance of their
      sufferings and their actions soon united this victorious
      detachment to the nation of the Visigoths; the troops of Colias
      and Suerid expected the approach of the great Fritigern, ranged
      themselves under his standard, and signalized their ardor in the
      siege of Hadrianople. But the resistance of the garrison informed
      the Barbarians, that in the attack of regular fortifications, the
      efforts of unskillful courage are seldom effectual. Their general
      acknowledged his error, raised the siege, declared that Òhe was
      at peace with stone walls,Ó 75 and revenged his disappointment on
      the adjacent country. He accepted, with pleasure, the useful
      reenforcement of hardy workmen, who labored in the gold mines of
      Thrace, 76 for the emolument, and under the lash, of an unfeeling
      master: 77 and these new associates conducted the Barbarians,
      through the secret paths, to the most sequestered places, which
      had been chosen to secure the inhabitants, the cattle, and the
      magazines of corn. With the assistance of such guides, nothing
      could remain impervious or inaccessible; resistance was fatal;
      flight was impracticable; and the patient submission of helpless
      innocence seldom found mercy from the Barbarian conqueror. In the
      course of these depredations, a great number of the children of
      the Goths, who had been sold into captivity, were restored to the
      embraces of their afflicted parents; but these tender interviews,
      which might have revived and cherished in their minds some
      sentiments of humanity, tended only to stimulate their native
      fierceness by the desire of revenge. They listened, with eager
      attention, to the complaints of their captive children, who had
      suffered the most cruel indignities from the lustful or angry
      passions of their masters, and the same cruelties, the same
      indignities, were severely retaliated on the sons and daughters
      of the Romans. 78

      71 (return) [ Vexillis de _more_ sublatis, auditisque _triste
      sonantibus classicis_. Ammian. xxxi. 5. These are the _rauca
      cornua_ of Claudian, (in Rufin. ii. 57,) the large horns of the
      _Uri_, or wild bull; such as have been more recently used by the
      Swiss Cantons of Uri and Underwald. (Simler de Republic‰ Helvet,
      l. ii. p. 201, edit. Fuselin. Tigur 1734.) Their military horn is
      finely, though perhaps casually, introduced in an original
      narrative of the battle of Nancy, (A.D. 1477.) ÒAttendant le
      combat le dit cor fut cornŽ par trois fois, tant que le vent du
      souffler pouvoit durer: ce qui esbahit fort Monsieur de
      Bourgoigne; _car deja ˆ Morat lÕavoit ouy_.Ó (See the Pices
      Justificatives in the 4to. edition of Philippe de Comines, tom.
      iii. p. 493.)]

      72 (return) [ Jornandes de Rebus Geticis, c. 26, p. 648, edit.
      Grot. These _splendidi panni_ (they are comparatively such) are
      undoubtedly transcribed from the larger histories of Priscus,
      Ablavius, or Cassiodorus.]

      73 (return) [ Cum populis suis longe ante suscepti. We are
      ignorant of the precise date and circumstances of their
      transmigration.]

      74 (return) [ An Imperial manufacture of shields, &c., was
      established at Hadrianople; and the populace were headed by the
      Fabricenses, or workmen. (Vales. ad Ammian. xxxi. 6.)]

      75 (return) [ Pacem sibi esse cum parietibus memorans. Ammian.
      xxxi. 7.]

      76 (return) [ These mines were in the country of the Bessi, in
      the ridge of mountains, the Rhodope, that runs between Philippi
      and Philippopolis; two Macedonian cities, which derived their
      name and origin from the father of Alexander. From the mines of
      Thrace he annually received the value, not the weight, of a
      thousand talents, (200,000l.,) a revenue which paid the phalanx,
      and corrupted the orators of Greece. See Diodor. Siculus, tom.
      ii. l. xvi. p. 88, edit. Wesseling. GodefroyÕs Commentary on the
      Theodosian Code, tom. iii. p. 496. Cellarius, Geograph. Antiq.
      tom. i. p. 676, 857. D Anville, Geographie Ancienne, tom. i. p.
      336.]

      77 (return) [ As those unhappy workmen often ran away, Valens had
      enacted severe laws to drag them from their hiding-places. Cod.
      Theodosian, l. x. tit xix leg. 5, 7.]

      78 (return) [ See Ammianus, xxxi. 5, 6. The historian of the
      Gothic war loses time and space, by an unseasonable
      recapitulation of the ancient inroads of the Barbarians.]

      The imprudence of Valens and his ministers had introduced into
      the heart of the empire a nation of enemies; but the Visigoths
      might even yet have been reconciled, by the manly confession of
      past errors, and the sincere performance of former engagements.
      These healing and temperate measures seemed to concur with the
      timorous disposition of the sovereign of the East: but, on this
      occasion alone, Valens was brave; and his unseasonable bravery
      was fatal to himself and to his subjects. He declared his
      intention of marching from Antioch to Constantinople, to subdue
      this dangerous rebellion; and, as he was not ignorant of the
      difficulties of the enterprise, he solicited the assistance of
      his nephew, the emperor Gratian, who commanded all the forces of
      the West. The veteran troops were hastily recalled from the
      defence of Armenia; that important frontier was abandoned to the
      discretion of Sapor; and the immediate conduct of the Gothic war
      was intrusted, during the absence of Valens, to his lieutenants
      Trajan and Profuturus, two generals who indulged themselves in a
      very false and favorable opinion of their own abilities. On their
      arrival in Thrace, they were joined by Richomer, count of the
      domestics; and the auxiliaries of the West, that marched under
      his banner, were composed of the Gallic legions, reduced indeed,
      by a spirit of desertion, to the vain appearances of strength and
      numbers. In a council of war, which was influenced by pride,
      rather than by reason, it was resolved to seek, and to encounter,
      the Barbarians, who lay encamped in the spacious and fertile
      meadows, near the most southern of the six mouths of the Danube.
      79 Their camp was surrounded by the usual fortification of
      wagons; 80 and the Barbarians, secure within the vast circle of
      the enclosure, enjoyed the fruits of their valor, and the spoils
      of the province. In the midst of riotous intemperance, the
      watchful Fritigern observed the motions, and penetrated the
      designs, of the Romans. He perceived, that the numbers of the
      enemy were continually increasing: and, as he understood their
      intention of attacking his rear, as soon as the scarcity of
      forage should oblige him to remove his camp, he recalled to their
      standard his predatory detachments, which covered the adjacent
      country. As soon as they descried the flaming beacons, 81 they
      obeyed, with incredible speed, the signal of their leader: the
      camp was filled with the martial crowd of Barbarians; their
      impatient clamors demanded the battle, and their tumultuous zeal
      was approved and animated by the spirit of their chiefs. The
      evening was already far advanced; and the two armies prepared
      themselves for the approaching combat, which was deferred only
      till the dawn of day.

      While the trumpets sounded to arms, the undaunted courage of the
      Goths was confirmed by the mutual obligation of a solemn oath;
      and as they advanced to meet the enemy, the rude songs, which
      celebrated the glory of their forefathers, were mingled with
      their fierce and dissonant outcries, and opposed to the
      artificial harmony of the Roman shout. Some military skill was
      displayed by Fritigern to gain the advantage of a commanding
      eminence; but the bloody conflict, which began and ended with the
      light, was maintained on either side, by the personal and
      obstinate efforts of strength, valor, and agility. The legions of
      Armenia supported their fame in arms; but they were oppressed by
      the irresistible weight of the hostile multitude the left wing of
      the Romans was thrown into disorder and the field was strewed
      with their mangled carcasses. This partial defeat was balanced,
      however, by partial success; and when the two armies, at a late
      hour of the evening, retreated to their respective camps, neither
      of them could claim the honors, or the effects, of a decisive
      victory. The real loss was more severely felt by the Romans, in
      proportion to the smallness of their numbers; but the Goths were
      so deeply confounded and dismayed by this vigorous, and perhaps
      unexpected, resistance, that they remained seven days within the
      circle of their fortifications. Such funeral rites, as the
      circumstances of time and place would admit, were piously
      discharged to some officers of distinguished rank; but the
      indiscriminate vulgar was left unburied on the plain. Their flesh
      was greedily devoured by the birds of prey, who in that age
      enjoyed very frequent and delicious feasts; and several years
      afterwards the white and naked bones, which covered the wide
      extent of the fields, presented to the eyes of Ammianus a
      dreadful monument of the battle of Salices. 82

      79 (return) [ The Itinerary of Antoninus (p. 226, 227, edit.
      Wesseling) marks the situation of this place about sixty miles
      north of Tomi, OvidÕs exile; and the name of _Salices_ (the
      willows) expresses the nature of the soil.]

      80 (return) [ This circle of wagons, the _Carrago_, was the usual
      fortification of the Barbarians. (Vegetius de Re Militari, l.
      iii. c. 10. Valesius ad Ammian. xxxi. 7.) The practice and the
      name were preserved by their descendants as late as the fifteenth
      century. The _Charroy_, which surrounded the _Ost_, is a word
      familiar to the readers of Froissard, or Comines.]

      81 (return) [ Statim ut accensi malleoli. I have used the literal
      sense of real torches or beacons; but I almost suspect, that it
      is only one of those turgid metaphors, those false ornaments,
      that perpetually disfigure to style of Ammianus.]

      82 (return) [ Indicant nunc usque albentes ossibus campi. Ammian.
      xxxi. 7. The historian might have viewed these plains, either as
      a soldier, or as a traveller. But his modesty has suppressed the
      adventures of his own life subsequent to the Persian wars of
      Constantius and Julian. We are ignorant of the time when he
      quitted the service, and retired to Rome, where he appears to
      have composed his History of his Own Times.]

      The progress of the Goths had been checked by the doubtful event
      of that bloody day; and the Imperial generals, whose army would
      have been consumed by the repetition of such a contest, embraced
      the more rational plan of destroying the Barbarians by the wants
      and pressure of their own multitudes. They prepared to confine
      the Visigoths in the narrow angle of land between the Danube, the
      desert of Scythia, and the mountains of H¾mus, till their
      strength and spirit should be insensibly wasted by the inevitable
      operation of famine. The design was prosecuted with some conduct
      and success: the Barbarians had almost exhausted their own
      magazines, and the harvests of the country; and the diligence of
      Saturninus, the master-general of the cavalry, was employed to
      improve the strength, and to contract the extent, of the Roman
      fortifications. His labors were interrupted by the alarming
      intelligence, that new swarms of Barbarians had passed the
      unguarded Danube, either to support the cause, or to imitate the
      example, of Fritigern. The just apprehension, that he himself
      might be surrounded, and overwhelmed, by the arms of hostile and
      unknown nations, compelled Saturninus to relinquish the siege of
      the Gothic camp; and the indignant Visigoths, breaking from their
      confinement, satiated their hunger and revenge by the repeated
      devastation of the fruitful country, which extends above three
      hundred miles from the banks of the Danube to the straits of the
      Hellespont. 83 The sagacious Fritigern had successfully appealed
      to the passions, as well as to the interest, of his Barbarian
      allies; and the love of rapine, and the hatred of Rome, seconded,
      or even prevented, the eloquence of his ambassadors. He cemented
      a strict and useful alliance with the great body of his
      countrymen, who obeyed Alatheus and Saphrax as the guardians of
      their infant king: the long animosity of rival tribes was
      suspended by the sense of their common interest; the independent
      part of the nation was associated under one standard; and the
      chiefs of the Ostrogoths appear to have yielded to the superior
      genius of the general of the Visigoths. He obtained the
      formidable aid of the Taifal¾, 8311 whose military renown was
      disgraced and polluted by the public infamy of their domestic
      manners. Every youth, on his entrance into the world, was united
      by the ties of honorable friendship, and brutal love, to some
      warrior of the tribe; nor could he hope to be released from this
      unnatural connection, till he had approved his manhood by
      slaying, in single combat, a huge bear, or a wild boar of the
      forest. 84 But the most powerful auxiliaries of the Goths were
      drawn from the camp of those enemies who had expelled them from
      their native seats. The loose subordination, and extensive
      possessions, of the Huns and the Alani, delayed the conquests,
      and distracted the councils, of that victorious people. Several
      of the hords were allured by the liberal promises of Fritigern;
      and the rapid cavalry of Scythia added weight and energy to the
      steady and strenuous efforts of the Gothic infantry. The
      Sarmatians, who could never forgive the successor of Valentinian,
      enjoyed and increased the general confusion; and a seasonable
      irruption of the Alemanni, into the provinces of Gaul, engaged
      the attention, and diverted the forces, of the emperor of the
      West. 85

      83 (return) [ Ammian. xxxi. 8.]

      8311 (return) [ The Taifal¾, who at this period inhabited the
      country which now forms the principality of Wallachia, were, in
      my opinion, the last remains of the great and powerful nation of
      the Dacians, (Daci or Dah¾.) which has given its name to these
      regions, over which they had ruled so long. The Taifal¾ passed
      with the Goths into the territory of the empire. A great number
      of them entered the Roman service, and were quartered in
      different provinces. They are mentioned in the Notitia Imperii.
      There was a considerable body in the country of the Pictavi, now
      Poithou. They long retained their manners and language, and
      caused the name of the Theofalgicus pagus to be given to the
      district they inhabited. Two places in the department of La
      Vendee, Tiffanges and La Tiffardire, still preserve evident
      traces of this denomination. St. Martin, iv. 118.ÑM.]

      84 (return) [ Hanc Taifalorum gentem turpem, et obscen¾ vit¾
      flagitiis ita accipimus mersam; ut apud eos nefandi concubitžs
      fÏdere copulentur mares puberes, ¾tatis viriditatem in eorum
      pollutis usibus consumpturi. Porro, siqui jam adultus aprum
      exceperit solus, vel interemit ursum immanem, colluvione
      liberatur incesti. Ammian. xxxi. 9. ÑÑAmong the Greeks, likewise,
      more especially among the Cretans, the holy bands of friendship
      were confirmed, and sullied, by unnatural love.]

      85 (return) [ Ammian. xxxi. 8, 9. Jerom (tom. i. p. 26)
      enumerates the nations and marks a calamitous period of twenty
      years. This epistle to Heliodorus was composed in the year 397,
      (Tillemont, MŽm. Eccles tom xii. p. 645.)]




      Chapter XXVI: Progress of The Huns.ÑPart IV.


      One of the most dangerous inconveniences of the introduction of
      the Barbarians into the army and the palace, was sensibly felt in
      their correspondence with their hostile countrymen; to whom they
      imprudently, or maliciously, revealed the weakness of the Roman
      empire. A soldier, of the lifeguards of Gratian, was of the
      nation of the Alemanni, and of the tribe of the Lentienses, who
      dwelt beyond the Lake of Constance. Some domestic business
      obliged him to request a leave of absence. In a short visit to
      his family and friends, he was exposed to their curious
      inquiries: and the vanity of the loquacious soldier tempted him
      to display his intimate acquaintance with the secrets of the
      state, and the designs of his master. The intelligence, that
      Gratian was preparing to lead the military force of Gaul, and of
      the West, to the assistance of his uncle Valens, pointed out to
      the restless spirit of the Alemanni the moment, and the mode, of
      a successful invasion. The enterprise of some light detachments,
      who, in the month of February, passed the Rhine upon the ice, was
      the prelude of a more important war. The boldest hopes of rapine,
      perhaps of conquest, outweighed the considerations of timid
      prudence, or national faith. Every forest, and every village,
      poured forth a band of hardy adventurers; and the great army of
      the Alemanni, which, on their approach, was estimated at forty
      thousand men by the fears of the people, was afterwards magnified
      to the number of seventy thousand by the vain and credulous
      flattery of the Imperial court. The legions, which had been
      ordered to march into Pannonia, were immediately recalled, or
      detained, for the defence of Gaul; the military command was
      divided between Nanienus and Mellobaudes; and the youthful
      emperor, though he respected the long experience and sober wisdom
      of the former, was much more inclined to admire, and to follow,
      the martial ardor of his colleague; who was allowed to unite the
      incompatible characters of count of the domestics, and of king of
      the Franks. His rival Priarius, king of the Alemanni, was guided,
      or rather impelled, by the same headstrong valor; and as their
      troops were animated by the spirit of their leaders, they met,
      they saw, they encountered each other, near the town of
      Argentaria, or Colmar, 86 in the plains of Alsace. The glory of
      the day was justly ascribed to the missile weapons, and
      well-practised evolutions, of the Roman soldiers; the Alemanni,
      who long maintained their ground, were slaughtered with
      unrelenting fury; five thousand only of the Barbarians escaped to
      the woods and mountains; and the glorious death of their king on
      the field of battle saved him from the reproaches of the people,
      who are always disposed to accuse the justice, or policy, of an
      unsuccessful war. After this signal victory, which secured the
      peace of Gaul, and asserted the honor of the Roman arms, the
      emperor Gratian appeared to proceed without delay on his Eastern
      expedition; but as he approached the confines of the Alemanni, he
      suddenly inclined to the left, surprised them by his unexpected
      passage of the Rhine, and boldly advanced into the heart of their
      country. The Barbarians opposed to his progress the obstacles of
      nature and of courage; and still continued to retreat, from one
      hill to another, till they were satisfied, by repeated trials, of
      the power and perseverance of their enemies. Their submission was
      accepted as a proof, not indeed of their sincere repentance, but
      of their actual distress; and a select number of their brave and
      robust youth was exacted from the faithless nation, as the most
      substantial pledge of their future moderation. The subjects of
      the empire, who had so often experienced that the Alemanni could
      neither be subdued by arms, nor restrained by treaties, might not
      promise themselves any solid or lasting tranquillity: but they
      discovered, in the virtues of their young sovereign, the prospect
      of a long and auspicious reign. When the legions climbed the
      mountains, and scaled the fortifications of the Barbarians, the
      valor of Gratian was distinguished in the foremost ranks; and the
      gilt and variegated armor of his guards was pierced and shattered
      by the blows which they had received in their constant attachment
      to the person of their sovereign. At the age of nineteen, the son
      of Valentinian seemed to possess the talents of peace and war;
      and his personal success against the Alemanni was interpreted as
      a sure presage of his Gothic triumphs. 87

      86 (return) [ The field of battle, _Argentaria_ or
      _Argentovaria_, is accurately fixed by M. DÕAnville (Notice de
      lÕAncienne Gaule, p. 96Ñ99) at twenty-three Gallic leagues, or
      thirty-four and a half Roman miles to the south of Strasburg.
      From its ruins the adjacent town of _Colmar_ has arisen. Note: It
      is rather Horburg, on the right bank of the River Ill, opposite
      to Colmar. From Schoepflin, Alsatia Illustrata. St. Martin, iv.
      121.ÑM.]

      87 (return) [ The full and impartial narrative of Ammianus (xxxi.
      10) may derive some additional light from the Epitome of Victor,
      the Chronicle of Jerom, and the History of Orosius, (l. vii. c.
      33, p. 552, edit. Havercamp.)]

      While Gratian deserved and enjoyed the applause of his subjects,
      the emperor Valens, who, at length, had removed his court and
      army from Antioch, was received by the people of Constantinople
      as the author of the public calamity. Before he had reposed
      himself ten days in the capital, he was urged by the licentious
      clamors of the Hippodrome to march against the Barbarians, whom
      he had invited into his dominions; and the citizens, who are
      always brave at a distance from any real danger, declared, with
      confidence, that, if they were supplied with arms, _they_ alone
      would undertake to deliver the province from the ravages of an
      insulting foe. 88 The vain reproaches of an ignorant multitude
      hastened the downfall of the Roman empire; they provoked the
      desperate rashness of Valens; who did not find, either in his
      reputation or in his mind, any motives to support with firmness
      the public contempt. He was soon persuaded, by the successful
      achievements of his lieutenants, to despise the power of the
      Goths, who, by the diligence of Fritigern, were now collected in
      the neighborhood of Hadrianople. The march of the Taifal¾ had
      been intercepted by the valiant Frigeric: the king of those
      licentious Barbarians was slain in battle; and the suppliant
      captives were sent into distant exile to cultivate the lands of
      Italy, which were assigned for their settlement in the vacant
      territories of Modena and Parma. 89 The exploits of Sebastian, 90
      who was recently engaged in the service of Valens, and promoted
      to the rank of master-general of the infantry, were still more
      honorable to himself, and useful to the republic. He obtained the
      permission of selecting three hundred soldiers from each of the
      legions; and this separate detachment soon acquired the spirit of
      discipline, and the exercise of arms, which were almost forgotten
      under the reign of Valens. By the vigor and conduct of Sebastian,
      a large body of the Goths were surprised in their camp; and the
      immense spoil, which was recovered from their hands, filled the
      city of Hadrianople, and the adjacent plain. The splendid
      narratives, which the general transmitted of his own exploits,
      alarmed the Imperial court by the appearance of superior merit;
      and though he cautiously insisted on the difficulties of the
      Gothic war, his valor was praised, his advice was rejected; and
      Valens, who listened with pride and pleasure to the flattering
      suggestions of the eunuchs of the palace, was impatient to seize
      the glory of an easy and assured conquest. His army was
      strengthened by a numerous reenforcement of veterans; and his
      march from Constantinople to Hadrianople was conducted with so
      much military skill, that he prevented the activity of the
      Barbarians, who designed to occupy the intermediate defiles, and
      to intercept either the troops themselves, or their convoys of
      provisions. The camp of Valens, which he pitched under the walls
      of Hadrianople, was fortified, according to the practice of the
      Romans, with a ditch and rampart; and a most important council
      was summoned, to decide the fate of the emperor and of the
      empire. The party of reason and of delay was strenuously
      maintained by Victor, who had corrected, by the lessons of
      experience, the native fierceness of the Sarmatian character;
      while Sebastian, with the flexible and obsequious eloquence of a
      courtier, represented every precaution, and every measure, that
      implied a doubt of immediate victory, as unworthy of the courage
      and majesty of their invincible monarch. The ruin of Valens was
      precipitated by the deceitful arts of Fritigern, and the prudent
      admonitions of the emperor of the West. The advantages of
      negotiating in the midst of war were perfectly understood by the
      general of the Barbarians; and a Christian ecclesiastic was
      despatched, as the holy minister of peace, to penetrate, and to
      perplex, the councils of the enemy. The misfortunes, as well as
      the provocations, of the Gothic nation, were forcibly and truly
      described by their ambassador; who protested, in the name of
      Fritigern, that he was still disposed to lay down his arms, or to
      employ them only in the defence of the empire; if he could secure
      for his wandering countrymen a tranquil settlement on the waste
      lands of Thrace, and a sufficient allowance of corn and cattle.
      But he added, in a whisper of confidential friendship, that the
      exasperated Barbarians were averse to these reasonable
      conditions; and that Fritigern was doubtful whether he could
      accomplish the conclusion of the treaty, unless he found himself
      supported by the presence and terrors of an Imperial army. About
      the same time, Count Richomer returned from the West to announce
      the defeat and submission of the Alemanni, to inform Valens that
      his nephew advanced by rapid marches at the head of the veteran
      and victorious legions of Gaul, and to request, in the name of
      Gratian and of the republic, that every dangerous and decisive
      measure might be suspended, till the junction of the two emperors
      should insure the success of the Gothic war. But the feeble
      sovereign of the East was actuated only by the fatal illusions of
      pride and jealousy. He disdained the importunate advice; he
      rejected the humiliating aid; he secretly compared the
      ignominious, at least the inglorious, period of his own reign,
      with the fame of a beardless youth; and Valens rushed into the
      field, to erect his imaginary trophy, before the diligence of his
      colleague could usurp any share of the triumphs of the day.

      88 (return) [ Moratus paucissimos dies, seditione popularium
      levium pulsus Ammian. xxxi. 11. Socrates (l. iv. c. 38) supplies
      the dates and some circumstances. * Note: Compare fragment of
      Eunapius. Mai, 272, in Niebuhr, p. 77.ÑM]

      89 (return) [ Vivosque omnes circa Mutinam, Regiumque, et Parmam,
      Italica oppida, rura culturos exterminavit. Ammianus, xxxi. 9.
      Those cities and districts, about ten years after the colony of
      the Taifal¾, appear in a very desolate state. See Muratori,
      Dissertazioni sopra le Antichitˆ Italiane, tom. i. Dissertat.
      xxi. p. 354.]

      90 (return) [ Ammian. xxxi. 11. Zosimus, l. iv. p. 228Ñ230. The
      latter expatiates on the desultory exploits of Sebastian, and
      despatches, in a few lines, the important battle of Hadrianople.
      According to the ecclesiastical critics, who hate Sebastian, the
      praise of Zosimus is disgrace, (Tillemont, Hist. des Empereurs,
      tom. v. p. 121.) His prejudice and ignorance undoubtedly render
      him a very questionable judge of merit.]

      On the ninth of August, a day which has deserved to be marked
      among the most inauspicious of the Roman Calendar, 91 the emperor
      Valens, leaving, under a strong guard, his baggage and military
      treasure, marched from Hadrianople to attack the Goths, who were
      encamped about twelve miles from the city. 92 By some mistake of
      the orders, or some ignorance of the ground, the right wing, or
      column of cavalry arrived in sight of the enemy, whilst the left
      was still at a considerable distance; the soldiers were
      compelled, in the sultry heat of summer, to precipitate their
      pace; and the line of battle was formed with tedious confusion
      and irregular delay. The Gothic cavalry had been detached to
      forage in the adjacent country; and Fritigern still continued to
      practise his customary arts. He despatched messengers of peace,
      made proposals, required hostages, and wasted the hours, till the
      Romans, exposed without shelter to the burning rays of the sun,
      were exhausted by thirst, hunger, and intolerable fatigue. The
      emperor was persuaded to send an ambassador to the Gothic camp;
      the zeal of Richomer, who alone had courage to accept the
      dangerous commission, was applauded; and the count of the
      domestics, adorned with the splendid ensigns of his dignity, had
      proceeded some way in the space between the two armies, when he
      was suddenly recalled by the alarm of battle. The hasty and
      imprudent attack was made by Bacurius the Iberian, who commanded
      a body of archers and targeteers; and as they advanced with
      rashness, they retreated with loss and disgrace. In the same
      moment, the flying squadrons of Alatheus and Saphrax, whose
      return was anxiously expected by the general of the Goths,
      descended like a whirlwind from the hills, swept across the
      plain, and added new terrors to the tumultuous, but irresistible
      charge of the Barbarian host. The event of the battle of
      Hadrianople, so fatal to Valens and to the empire, may be
      described in a few words: the Roman cavalry fled; the infantry
      was abandoned, surrounded, and cut in pieces. The most skilful
      evolutions, the firmest courage, are scarcely sufficient to
      extricate a body of foot, encompassed, on an open plain, by
      superior numbers of horse; but the troops of Valens, oppressed by
      the weight of the enemy and their own fears, were crowded into a
      narrow space, where it was impossible for them to extend their
      ranks, or even to use, with effect, their swords and javelins. In
      the midst of tumult, of slaughter, and of dismay, the emperor,
      deserted by his guards and wounded, as it was supposed, with an
      arrow, sought protection among the Lancearii and the Mattiarii,
      who still maintained their ground with some appearance of order
      and firmness. His faithful generals, Trajan and Victor, who
      perceived his danger, loudly exclaimed that all was lost, unless
      the person of the emperor could be saved. Some troops, animated
      by their exhortation, advanced to his relief: they found only a
      bloody spot, covered with a heap of broken arms and mangled
      bodies, without being able to discover their unfortunate prince,
      either among the living or the dead. Their search could not
      indeed be successful, if there is any truth in the circumstances
      with which some historians have related the death of the emperor.

      By the care of his attendants, Valens was removed from the field
      of battle to a neighboring cottage, where they attempted to dress
      his wound, and to provide for his future safety. But this humble
      retreat was instantly surrounded by the enemy: they tried to
      force the door, they were provoked by a discharge of arrows from
      the roof, till at length, impatient of delay, they set fire to a
      pile of dry magots, and consumed the cottage with the Roman
      emperor and his train. Valens perished in the flames; and a
      youth, who dropped from the window, alone escaped, to attest the
      melancholy tale, and to inform the Goths of the inestimable prize
      which they had lost by their own rashness. A great number of
      brave and distinguished officers perished in the battle of
      Hadrianople, which equalled in the actual loss, and far surpassed
      in the fatal consequences, the misfortune which Rome had formerly
      sustained in the fields of Cann¾. 93 Two master-generals of the
      cavalry and infantry, two great officers of the palace, and
      thirty-five tribunes, were found among the slain; and the death
      of Sebastian might satisfy the world, that he was the victim, as
      well as the author, of the public calamity. Above two thirds of
      the Roman army were destroyed: and the darkness of the night was
      esteemed a very favorable circumstance, as it served to conceal
      the flight of the multitude, and to protect the more orderly
      retreat of Victor and Richomer, who alone, amidst the general
      consternation, maintained the advantage of calm courage and
      regular discipline. 94

      91 (return) [ Ammianus (xxxi. 12, 13) almost alone describes the
      councils and actions which were terminated by the fatal battle of
      Hadrianople. We might censure the vices of his style, the
      disorder and perplexity of his narrative: but we must now take
      leave of this impartial historian; and reproach is silenced by
      our regret for such an irreparable loss.]

      92 (return) [ The difference of the eight miles of Ammianus, and
      the twelve of Idatius, can only embarrass those critics (Valesius
      ad loc.,) who suppose a great army to be a mathematical point,
      without space or dimensions.]

      93 (return) [ Nec ulla annalibus, pr¾ter Cannensem pugnam, ita ad
      internecionem res legitur gesta. Ammian. xxxi. 13. According to
      the grave Polybius, no more than 370 horse, and 3,000 foot,
      escaped from the field of Cann¾: 10,000 were made prisoners; and
      the number of the slain amounted to 5,630 horse, and 70,000 foot,
      (Polyb. l. iii. p 371, edit. Casaubon, 8vo.) Livy (xxii. 49) is
      somewhat less bloody: he slaughters only 2,700 horse, and 40,000
      foot. The Roman army was supposed to consist of 87,200 effective
      men, (xxii. 36.)]

      94 (return) [ We have gained some faint light from Jerom, (tom.
      i. p. 26 and in Chron. p. 188,) Victor, (in Epitome,) Orosius,
      (l. vii. c. 33, p. 554,) Jornandes, (c. 27,) Zosimus, (l. iv. p.
      230,) Socrates, (l. iv. c. 38,) Sozomen, (l. vi. c. 40,) Idatius,
      (in Chron.) But their united evidence, if weighed against
      Ammianus alone, is light and unsubstantial.]

      While the impressions of grief and terror were still recent in
      the minds of men, the most celebrated rhetorician of the age
      composed the funeral oration of a vanquished army, and of an
      unpopular prince, whose throne was already occupied by a
      stranger. ÒThere are not wanting,Ó says the candid Libanius,
      Òthose who arraign the prudence of the emperor, or who impute the
      public misfortune to the want of courage and discipline in the
      troops. For my own part, I reverence the memory of their former
      exploits: I reverence the glorious death, which they bravely
      received, standing, and fighting in their ranks: I reverence the
      field of battle, stained with _their_ blood, and the blood of the
      Barbarians. Those honorable marks have been already washed away
      by the rains; but the lofty monuments of their bones, the bones
      of generals, of centurions, and of valiant warriors, claim a
      longer period of duration. The king himself fought and fell in
      the foremost ranks of the battle. His attendants presented him
      with the fleetest horses of the Imperial stable, that would soon
      have carried him beyond the pursuit of the enemy. They vainly
      pressed him to reserve his important life for the future service
      of the republic. He still declared that he was unworthy to
      survive so many of the bravest and most faithful of his subjects;
      and the monarch was nobly buried under a mountain of the slain.
      Let none, therefore, presume to ascribe the victory of the
      Barbarians to the fear, the weakness, or the imprudence, of the
      Roman troops. The chiefs and the soldiers were animated by the
      virtue of their ancestors, whom they equalled in discipline and
      the arts of war. Their generous emulation was supported by the
      love of glory, which prompted them to contend at the same time
      with heat and thirst, with fire and the sword; and cheerfully to
      embrace an honorable death, as their refuge against flight and
      infamy. The indignation of the gods has been the only cause of
      the success of our enemies.Ó The truth of history may disclaim
      some parts of this panegyric, which cannot strictly be reconciled
      with the character of Valens, or the circumstances of the battle:
      but the fairest commendation is due to the eloquence, and still
      more to the generosity, of the sophist of Antioch. 95

      95 (return) [ Libanius de ulciscend. Julian. nece, c. 3, in
      Fabricius, Bibliot Gr¾c. tom. vii. p. 146Ñ148.]

      The pride of the Goths was elated by this memorable victory; but
      their avarice was disappointed by the mortifying discovery, that
      the richest part of the Imperial spoil had been within the walls
      of Hadrianople. They hastened to possess the reward of their
      valor; but they were encountered by the remains of a vanquished
      army, with an intrepid resolution, which was the effect of their
      despair, and the only hope of their safety. The walls of the
      city, and the ramparts of the adjacent camp, were lined with
      military engines, that threw stones of an enormous weight; and
      astonished the ignorant Barbarians by the noise, and velocity,
      still more than by the real effects, of the discharge. The
      soldiers, the citizens, the provincials, the domestics of the
      palace, were united in the danger, and in the defence: the
      furious assault of the Goths was repulsed; their secret arts of
      treachery and treason were discovered; and, after an obstinate
      conflict of many hours, they retired to their tents; convinced,
      by experience, that it would be far more advisable to observe the
      treaty, which their sagacious leader had tacitly stipulated with
      the fortifications of great and populous cities. After the hasty
      and impolitic massacre of three hundred deserters, an act of
      justice extremely useful to the discipline of the Roman armies,
      the Goths indignantly raised the siege of Hadrianople. The scene
      of war and tumult was instantly converted into a silent solitude:
      the multitude suddenly disappeared; the secret paths of the woods
      and mountains were marked with the footsteps of the trembling
      fugitives, who sought a refuge in the distant cities of Illyricum
      and Macedonia; and the faithful officers of the household, and
      the treasury, cautiously proceeded in search of the emperor, of
      whose death they were still ignorant. The tide of the Gothic
      inundation rolled from the walls of Hadrianople to the suburbs of
      Constantinople. The Barbarians were surprised with the splendid
      appearance of the capital of the East, the height and extent of
      the walls, the myriads of wealthy and affrighted citizens who
      crowded the ramparts, and the various prospect of the sea and
      land. While they gazed with hopeless desire on the inaccessible
      beauties of Constantinople, a sally was made from one of the
      gates by a party of Saracens, 96 who had been fortunately engaged
      in the service of Valens. The cavalry of Scythia was forced to
      yield to the admirable swiftness and spirit of the Arabian
      horses: their riders were skilled in the evolutions of irregular
      war; and the Northern Barbarians were astonished and dismayed, by
      the inhuman ferocity of the Barbarians of the South.

      A Gothic soldier was slain by the dagger of an Arab; and the
      hairy, naked savage, applying his lips to the wound, expressed a
      horrid delight, while he sucked the blood of his vanquished
      enemy. 97 The army of the Goths, laden with the spoils of the
      wealthy suburbs and the adjacent territory, slowly moved, from
      the Bosphorus, to the mountains which form the western boundary
      of Thrace. The important pass of Succi was betrayed by the fear,
      or the misconduct, of Maurus; and the Barbarians, who no longer
      had any resistance to apprehend from the scattered and vanquished
      troops of the East, spread themselves over the face of a fertile
      and cultivated country, as far as the confines of Italy and the
      Hadriatic Sea. 98

      96 (return) [ Valens had gained, or rather purchased, the
      friendship of the Saracens, whose vexatious inroads were felt on
      the borders of PhÏnicia, Palestine, and Egypt. The Christian
      faith had been lately introduced among a people, reserved, in a
      future age, to propagate another religion, (Tillemont, Hist. des
      Empereurs, tom. v. p. 104, 106, 141. MŽm. Eccles. tom. vii. p.
      593.)]

      97 (return) [ Crinitus quidam, nudus omnia pr¾ter pubem,
      subraunum et ugubre strepens. Ammian. xxxi. 16, and Vales. ad
      loc. The Arabs often fought naked; a custom which may be ascribed
      to their sultry climate, and ostentatious bravery. The
      description of this unknown savage is the lively portrait of
      Derar, a name so dreadful to the Christians of Syria. See
      OckleyÕs Hist. of the Saracens, vol. i. p. 72, 84, 87.]

      98 (return) [ The series of events may still be traced in the
      last pages of Ammianus, (xxxi. 15, 16.) Zosimus, (l. iv. p. 227,
      231,) whom we are now reduced to cherish, misplaces the sally of
      the Arabs before the death of Valens. Eunapius (in Excerpt.
      Legat. p. 20) praises the fertility of Thrace, Macedonia, &c.]

      The Romans, who so coolly, and so concisely, mention the acts of
      _justice_ which were exercised by the legions, 99 reserve their
      compassion, and their eloquence, for their own sufferings, when
      the provinces were invaded, and desolated, by the arms of the
      successful Barbarians. The simple circumstantial narrative (did
      such a narrative exist) of the ruin of a single town, of the
      misfortunes of a single family, 100 might exhibit an interesting
      and instructive picture of human manners: but the tedious
      repetition of vague and declamatory complaints would fatigue the
      attention of the most patient reader. The same censure may be
      applied, though not perhaps in an equal degree, to the profane,
      and the ecclesiastical, writers of this unhappy period; that
      their minds were inflamed by popular and religious animosity; and
      that the true size and color of every object is falsified by the
      exaggerations of their corrupt eloquence. The vehement Jerom 101
      might justly deplore the calamities inflicted by the Goths, and
      their barbarous allies, on his native country of Pannonia, and
      the wide extent of the provinces, from the walls of
      Constantinople to the foot of the Julian Alps; the rapes, the
      massacres, the conflagrations; and, above all, the profanation of
      the churches, that were turned into stables, and the contemptuous
      treatment of the relics of holy martyrs. But the Saint is surely
      transported beyond the limits of nature and history, when he
      affirms, Òthat, in those desert countries, nothing was left
      except the sky and the earth; that, after the destruction of the
      cities, and the extirpation of the human race, the land was
      overgrown with thick forests and inextricable brambles; and that
      the universal desolation, announced by the prophet Zephaniah, was
      accomplished, in the scarcity of the beasts, the birds, and even
      of the fish.Ó These complaints were pronounced about twenty years
      after the death of Valens; and the Illyrian provinces, which were
      constantly exposed to the invasion and passage of the Barbarians,
      still continued, after a calamitous period of ten centuries, to
      supply new materials for rapine and destruction. Could it even be
      supposed, that a large tract of country had been left without
      cultivation and without inhabitants, the consequences might not
      have been so fatal to the inferior productions of animated
      nature. The useful and feeble animals, which are nourished by the
      hand of man, might suffer and perish, if they were deprived of
      his protection; but the beasts of the forest, his enemies or his
      victims, would multiply in the free and undisturbed possession of
      their solitary domain. The various tribes that people the air, or
      the waters, are still less connected with the fate of the human
      species; and it is highly probable that the fish of the Danube
      would have felt more terror and distress, from the approach of a
      voracious pike, than from the hostile inroad of a Gothic army.

      99 (return) [ Observe with how much indifference C¾sar relates,
      in the Commentaries of the Gallic war, _that_ he put to death the
      whole senate of the Veneti, who had yielded to his mercy, (iii.
      16;) _that_ he labored to extirpate the whole nation of the
      Eburones, (vi. 31;) _that_ forty thousand persons were massacred
      at Bourges by the just revenge of his soldiers, who spared
      neither age nor sex, (vii. 27,) &c.]

      100 (return) [ Such are the accounts of the sack of Magdeburgh,
      by the ecclesiastic and the fisherman, which Mr. Harte has
      transcribed, (Hist. of Gustavus Adolphus, vol. i. p. 313Ñ320,)
      with some apprehension of violating the _dignity_ of history.]

      101 (return) [ Et vastatis urbibus, hominibusque interfectis,
      solitudinem et _raritatem bestiarum_ quoque fieri, _et
      volatilium, pisciumque:_ testis Illyricum est, testis Thracia,
      testis in quo ortus sum solum, (Pannonia;) ubi pr¾ter cÏlum et
      terram, et crescentes vepres, et condensa sylvarum _cuncta
      perierunt_. Tom. vii. p. 250, l, Cap. Sophonias and tom. i. p.
      26.]




      Chapter XXVI: Progress of The Huns.ÑPart V.


      Whatever may have been the just measure of the calamities of
      Europe, there was reason to fear that the same calamities would
      soon extend to the peaceful countries of Asia. The sons of the
      Goths had been judiciously distributed through the cities of the
      East; and the arts of education were employed to polish, and
      subdue, the native fierceness of their temper. In the space of
      about twelve years, their numbers had continually increased; and
      the children, who, in the first emigration, were sent over the
      Hellespont, had attained, with rapid growth, the strength and
      spirit of perfect manhood. 102 It was impossible to conceal from
      their knowledge the events of the Gothic war; and, as those
      daring youths had not studied the language of dissimulation, they
      betrayed their wish, their desire, perhaps their intention, to
      emulate the glorious example of their fathers. The danger of the
      times seemed to justify the jealous suspicions of the
      provincials; and these suspicions were admitted as unquestionable
      evidence, that the Goths of Asia had formed a secret and
      dangerous conspiracy against the public safety. The death of
      Valens had left the East without a sovereign; and Julius, who
      filled the important station of master-general of the troops,
      with a high reputation of diligence and ability, thought it his
      duty to consult the senate of Constantinople; which he
      considered, during the vacancy of the throne, as the
      representative council of the nation. As soon as he had obtained
      the discretionary power of acting as he should judge most
      expedient for the good of the republic, he assembled the
      principal officers, and privately concerted effectual measures
      for the execution of his bloody design. An order was immediately
      promulgated, that, on a stated day, the Gothic youth should
      assemble in the capital cities of their respective provinces;
      and, as a report was industriously circulated, that they were
      summoned to receive a liberal gift of lands and money, the
      pleasing hope allayed the fury of their resentment, and, perhaps,
      suspended the motions of the conspiracy. On the appointed day,
      the unarmed crowd of the Gothic youth was carefully collected in
      the square or Forum; the streets and avenues were occupied by the
      Roman troops, and the roofs of the houses were covered with
      archers and slingers. At the same hour, in all the cities of the
      East, the signal was given of indiscriminate slaughter; and the
      provinces of Asia were delivered by the cruel prudence of Julius,
      from a domestic enemy, who, in a few months, might have carried
      fire and sword from the Hellespont to the Euphrates. 103 The
      urgent consideration of the public safety may undoubtedly
      authorize the violation of every positive law. How far that, or
      any other, consideration may operate to dissolve the natural
      obligations of humanity and justice, is a doctrine of which I
      still desire to remain ignorant.

      102 (return) [ Eunapius (in Excerpt. Legat. p. 20) foolishly
      supposes a pr¾ternatural growth of the young Goths, that he may
      introduce CadmusÕs armed men, who sprang from the dragonÕs teeth,
      &c. Such was the Greek eloquence of the times.]

      103 (return) [ Ammianus evidently approves this execution,
      efficacia velox et salutaris, which concludes his work, (xxxi.
      16.) Zosimus, who is curious and copious, (l. iv. p. 233Ñ236,)
      mistakes the date, and labors to find the reason, why Julius did
      not consult the emperor Theodosius who had not yet ascended the
      throne of the East.]

      The emperor Gratian was far advanced on his march towards the
      plains of Hadrianople, when he was informed, at first by the
      confused voice of fame, and afterwards by the more accurate
      reports of Victor and Richomer, that his impatient colleague had
      been slain in battle, and that two thirds of the Roman army were
      exterminated by the sword of the victorious Goths. Whatever
      resentment the rash and jealous vanity of his uncle might
      deserve, the resentment of a generous mind is easily subdued by
      the softer emotions of grief and compassion; and even the sense
      of pity was soon lost in the serious and alarming consideration
      of the state of the republic. Gratian was too late to assist, he
      was too weak to revenge, his unfortunate colleague; and the
      valiant and modest youth felt himself unequal to the support of a
      sinking world. A formidable tempest of the Barbarians of Germany
      seemed ready to burst over the provinces of Gaul; and the mind of
      Gratian was oppressed and distracted by the administration of the
      Western empire. In this important crisis, the government of the
      East, and the conduct of the Gothic war, required the undivided
      attention of a hero and a statesman. A subject invested with such
      ample command would not long have preserved his fidelity to a
      distant benefactor; and the Imperial council embraced the wise
      and manly resolution of conferring an obligation, rather than of
      yielding to an insult. It was the wish of Gratian to bestow the
      purple as the reward of virtue; but, at the age of nineteen, it
      is not easy for a prince, educated in the supreme rank, to
      understand the true characters of his ministers and generals. He
      attempted to weigh, with an impartial hand, their various merits
      and defects; and, whilst he checked the rash confidence of
      ambition, he distrusted the cautious wisdom which despaired of
      the republic. As each moment of delay diminished something of the
      power and resources of the future sovereign of the East, the
      situation of the times would not allow a tedious debate. The
      choice of Gratian was soon declared in favor of an exile, whose
      father, only three years before, had suffered, under the sanction
      of _his_ authority, an unjust and ignominious death. The great
      Theodosius, a name celebrated in history, and dear to the
      Catholic church, 104 was summoned to the Imperial court, which
      had gradually retreated from the confines of Thrace to the more
      secure station of Sirmium. Five months after the death of Valens,
      the emperor Gratian produced before the assembled troops _his_
      colleague and _their_ master; who, after a modest, perhaps a
      sincere, resistance, was compelled to accept, amidst the general
      acclamations, the diadem, the purple, and the equal title of
      Augustus. 105 The provinces of Thrace, Asia, and Egypt, over
      which Valens had reigned, were resigned to the administration of
      the new emperor; but, as he was specially intrusted with the
      conduct of the Gothic war, the Illyrian pr¾fecture was
      dismembered; and the two great dioceses of Dacia and Macedonia
      were added to the dominions of the Eastern empire. 106

      104 (return) [ A life of Theodosius the Great was composed in the
      last century, (Paris, 1679, in 4to-1680, 12mo.,) to inflame the
      mind of the young Dauphin with Catholic zeal. The author,
      Flechier, afterwards bishop of Nismes, was a celebrated preacher;
      and his history is adorned, or tainted, with pulpit eloquence;
      but he takes his learning from Baronius, and his principles from
      St. Ambrose and St Augustin.]

      105 (return) [ The birth, character, and elevation of Theodosius
      are marked in Pacatus, (in Panegyr. Vet. xii. 10, 11, 12,)
      Themistius, (Orat. xiv. p. 182,) (Zosimus, l. iv. p. 231,)
      Augustin. (de Civitat. Dei. v. 25,) Orosius, (l. vii. c. 34,)
      Sozomen, (l. vii. c. 2,) Socrates, (l. v. c. 2,) Theodoret, (l.
      v. c. 5,) Philostorgius, (l. ix. c. 17, with Godefroy, p. 393,)
      the Epitome of Victor, and the Chronicles of Prosper, Idatius,
      and Marcellinus, in the Thesaurus Temporum of Scaliger. * Note:
      Add a hostile fragment of Eunapius. Mai, p. 273, in Niebuhr, p
      178ÑM.]

      106 (return) [ Tillemont, Hist. des Empereurs, tom. v. p. 716,
      &c.]

      The same province, and perhaps the same city, 107 which had given
      to the throne the virtues of Trajan, and the talents of Hadrian,
      was the orignal seat of another family of Spaniards, who, in a
      less fortunate age, possessed, near fourscore years, the
      declining empire of Rome. 108 They emerged from the obscurity of
      municipal honors by the active spirit of the elder Theodosius, a
      general whose exploits in Britain and Africa have formed one of
      the most splendid parts of the annals of Valentinian. The son of
      that general, who likewise bore the name of Theodosius, was
      educated, by skilful preceptors, in the liberal studies of youth;
      but he was instructed in the art of war by the tender care and
      severe discipline of his father. 109 Under the standard of such a
      leader, young Theodosius sought glory and knowledge, in the most
      distant scenes of military action; inured his constitution to the
      difference of seasons and climates; distinguished his valor by
      sea and land; and observed the various warfare of the Scots, the
      Saxons, and the Moors. His own merit, and the recommendation of
      the conqueror of Africa, soon raised him to a separate command;
      and, in the station of Duke of M¾sia, he vanquished an army of
      Sarmatians; saved the province; deserved the love of the
      soldiers; and provoked the envy of the court. 110 His rising
      fortunes were soon blasted by the disgrace and execution of his
      illustrious father; and Theodosius obtained, as a favor, the
      permission of retiring to a private life in his native province
      of Spain. He displayed a firm and temperate character in the ease
      with which he adapted himself to this new situation. His time was
      almost equally divided between the town and country; the spirit,
      which had animated his public conduct, was shown in the active
      and affectionate performance of every social duty; and the
      diligence of the soldier was profitably converted to the
      improvement of his ample patrimony, 111 which lay between
      Valladolid and Segovia, in the midst of a fruitful district,
      still famous for a most exquisite breed of sheep. 112 From the
      innocent, but humble labors of his farm, Theodosius was
      transported, in less than four months, to the throne of the
      Eastern empire; and the whole period of the history of the world
      will not perhaps afford a similar example, of an elevation at the
      same time so pure and so honorable. The princes who peaceably
      inherit the sceptre of their fathers, claim and enjoy a legal
      right, the more secure as it is absolutely distinct from the
      merits of their personal characters. The subjects, who, in a
      monarchy, or a popular state, acquire the possession of supreme
      power, may have raised themselves, by the superiority either of
      genius or virtue, above the heads of their equals; but their
      virtue is seldom exempt from ambition; and the cause of the
      successful candidate is frequently stained by the guilt of
      conspiracy, or civil war. Even in those governments which allow
      the reigning monarch to declare a colleague or a successor, his
      partial choice, which may be influenced by the blindest passions,
      is often directed to an unworthy object But the most suspicious
      malignity cannot ascribe to Theodosius, in his obscure solitude
      of Caucha, the arts, the desires, or even the hopes, of an
      ambitious statesman; and the name of the Exile would long since
      have been forgotten, if his genuine and distinguished virtues had
      not left a deep impression in the Imperial court. During the
      season of prosperity, he had been neglected; but, in the public
      distress, his superior merit was universally felt and
      acknowledged. What confidence must have been reposed in his
      integrity, since Gratian could trust, that a pious son would
      forgive, for the sake of the republic, the murder of his father!
      What expectations must have been formed of his abilities to
      encourage the hope, that a single man could save, and restore,
      the empire of the East! Theodosius was invested with the purple
      in the thirty-third year of his age. The vulgar gazed with
      admiration on the manly beauty of his face, and the graceful
      majesty of his person, which they were pleased to compare with
      the pictures and medals of the emperor Trajan; whilst intelligent
      observers discovered, in the qualities of his heart and
      understanding, a more important resemblance to the best and
      greatest of the Roman princes.

      107 (return) [ _Italica_, founded by Scipio Africanus for his
      wounded veterans of _Italy_. The ruins still appear, about a
      league above Seville, but on the opposite bank of the river. See
      the Hispania Illustrata of Nonius, a short though valuable
      treatise, c. xvii. p. 64Ñ67.]

      108 (return) [ I agree with Tillemont (Hist. des Empereurs, tom.
      v. p. 726) in suspecting the royal pedigree, which remained a
      secret till the promotion of Theodosius. Even after that event,
      the silence of Pacatus outweighs the venal evidence of
      Themistius, Victor, and Claudian, who connect the family of
      Theodosius with the blood of Trajan and Hadrian.]

      109 (return) [ Pacatas compares, and consequently prefers, the
      youth of Theodosius to the military education of Alexander,
      Hannibal, and the second Africanus; who, like him, had served
      under their fathers, (xii. 8.)]

      110 (return) [ Ammianus (xxix. 6) mentions this victory of
      Theodosius Junior Dux M¾si¾, prima etiam tum lanugine juvenis,
      princeps postea perspectissimus. The same fact is attested by
      Themistius and Zosimus but Theodoret, (l. v. c. 5,) who adds some
      curious circumstances, strangely applies it to the time of the
      interregnum.]

      111 (return) [ Pacatus (in Panegyr. Vet. xii. 9) prefers the
      rustic life of Theodosius to that of Cincinnatus; the one was the
      effect of choice, the other of poverty.]

      112 (return) [ M. DÕAnville (Geographie Ancienne, tom. i. p. 25)
      has fixed the situation of Caucha, or Coca, in the old province
      of Gallicia, where Zosimus and Idatius have placed the birth, or
      patrimony, of Theodosius.]

      It is not without the most sincere regret, that I must now take
      leave of an accurate and faithful guide, who has composed the
      history of his own times, without indulging the prejudices and
      passions, which usually affect the mind of a contemporary.
      Ammianus Marcellinus, who terminates his useful work with the
      defeat and death of Valens, recommends the more glorious subject
      of the ensuing reign to the youthful vigor and eloquence of the
      rising generation. 113 The rising generation was not disposed to
      accept his advice or to imitate his example; 114 and, in the
      study of the reign of Theodosius, we are reduced to illustrate
      the partial narrative of Zosimus, by the obscure hints of
      fragments and chronicles, by the figurative style of poetry or
      panegyric, and by the precarious assistance of the ecclesiastical
      writers, who, in the heat of religious faction, are apt to
      despise the profane virtues of sincerity and moderation.
      Conscious of these disadvantages, which will continue to involve
      a considerable portion of the decline and fall of the Roman
      empire, I shall proceed with doubtful and timorous steps. Yet I
      may boldly pronounce, that the battle of Hadrianople was never
      revenged by any signal or decisive victory of Theodosius over the
      Barbarians: and the expressive silence of his venal orators may
      be confirmed by the observation of the condition and
      circumstances of the times. The fabric of a mighty state, which
      has been reared by the labors of successive ages, could not be
      overturned by the misfortune of a single day, if the fatal power
      of the imagination did not exaggerate the real measure of the
      calamity. The loss of forty thousand Romans, who fell in the
      plains of Hadrianople, might have been soon recruited in the
      populous provinces of the East, which contained so many millions
      of inhabitants. The courage of a soldier is found to be the
      cheapest, and most common, quality of human nature; and
      sufficient skill to encounter an undisciplined foe might have
      been speedily taught by the care of the surviving centurions. If
      the Barbarians were mounted on the horses, and equipped with the
      armor, of their vanquished enemies, the numerous studs of
      Cappadocia and Spain would have supplied new squadrons of
      cavalry; the thirty-four arsenals of the empire were plentifully
      stored with magazines of offensive and defensive arms: and the
      wealth of Asia might still have yielded an ample fund for the
      expenses of the war. But the effects which were produced by the
      battle of Hadrianople on the minds of the Barbarians and of the
      Romans, extended the victory of the former, and the defeat of the
      latter, far beyond the limits of a single day. A Gothic chief was
      heard to declare, with insolent moderation, that, for his own
      part, he was fatigued with slaughter: but that he was astonished
      how a people, who fled before him like a flock of sheep, could
      still presume to dispute the possession of their treasures and
      provinces. 115 The same terrors which the name of the Huns had
      spread among the Gothic tribes, were inspired, by the formidable
      name of the Goths, among the subjects and soldiers of the Roman
      empire. 116 If Theodosius, hastily collecting his scattered
      forces, had led them into the field to encounter a victorious
      enemy, his army would have been vanquished by their own fears;
      and his rashness could not have been excused by the chance of
      success. But the _great_ Theodosius, an epithet which he
      honorably deserved on this momentous occasion, conducted himself
      as the firm and faithful guardian of the republic. He fixed his
      head-quarters at Thessalonica, the capital of the Macedonian
      diocese; 117 from whence he could watch the irregular motions of
      the Barbarians, and direct the operations of his lieutenants,
      from the gates of Constantinople to the shores of the Hadriatic.
      The fortifications and garrisons of the cities were strengthened;
      and the troops, among whom a sense of order and discipline was
      revived, were insensibly emboldened by the confidence of their
      own safety. From these secure stations, they were encouraged to
      make frequent sallies on the Barbarians, who infested the
      adjacent country; and, as they were seldom allowed to engage,
      without some decisive superiority, either of ground or of
      numbers, their enterprises were, for the most part, successful;
      and they were soon convinced, by their own experience, of the
      possibility of vanquishing their _invincible_ enemies. The
      detachments of these separate garrisons were generally united
      into small armies; the same cautious measures were pursued,
      according to an extensive and well-concerted plan of operations;
      the events of each day added strength and spirit to the Roman
      arms; and the artful diligence of the emperor, who circulated the
      most favorable reports of the success of the war, contributed to
      subdue the pride of the Barbarians, and to animate the hopes and
      courage of his subjects. If, instead of this faint and imperfect
      outline, we could accurately represent the counsels and actions
      of Theodosius, in four successive campaigns, there is reason to
      believe, that his consummate skill would deserve the applause of
      every military reader. The republic had formerly been saved by
      the delays of Fabius; and, while the splendid trophies of Scipio,
      in the field of Zama, attract the eyes of posterity, the camps
      and marches of the dictator among the hills of the Campania, may
      claim a juster proportion of the solid and independent fame,
      which the general is not compelled to share, either with fortune
      or with his troops. Such was likewise the merit of Theodosius;
      and the infirmities of his body, which most unseasonably
      languished under a long and dangerous disease, could not oppress
      the vigor of his mind, or divert his attention from the public
      service. 118

      113 (return) [ Let us hear Ammianus himself. H¾c, ut miles
      quondam et Gr¾cus, a principatu C¾saris Nerv¾ exorsus, adusque
      Valentis inter, pro virium explicavi mensur‰: opus veritatem
      professum nun quam, ut arbitror, sciens, silentio ausus
      corrumpere vel mendacio. Scribant reliqua potiores ¾tate,
      doctrinisque florentes. Quos id, si libuerit, aggressuros,
      procudere linguas ad majores moneo stilos. Ammian. xxxi. 16. The
      first thirteen books, a superficial epitome of two hundred and
      fifty-seven years, are now lost: the last eighteen, which contain
      no more than twenty-five years, still preserve the copious and
      authentic history of his own times.]

      114 (return) [ Ammianus was the last subject of Rome who composed
      a profane history in the Latin language. The East, in the next
      century, produced some rhetorical historians, Zosimus,
      Olympiedorus, Malchus, Candidus &c. See Vossius de Historicis
      Gr¾cis, l. ii. c. 18, de Historicis Latinis l. ii. c. 10, &c.]

      115 (return) [ Chrysostom, tom. i. p. 344, edit. Montfaucon. I
      have verified and examined this passage: but I should never,
      without the aid of Tillemont, (Hist. des Emp. tom. v. p. 152,)
      have detected an historical anecdote, in a strange medley of
      moral and mystic exhortations, addressed, by the preacher of
      Antioch, to a young widow.]

      116 (return) [ Eunapius, in Excerpt. Legation. p. 21.]

      117 (return) [ See GodefroyÕs Chronology of the Laws. Codex
      Theodos tom. l. Prolegomen. p. xcix.Ñciv.]

      118 (return) [ Most writers insist on the illness, and long
      repose, of Theodosius, at Thessalonica: Zosimus, to diminish his
      glory; Jornandes, to favor the Goths; and the ecclesiastical
      writers, to introduce his baptism.]

      The deliverance and peace of the Roman provinces 119 was the work
      of prudence, rather than of valor: the prudence of Theodosius was
      seconded by fortune: and the emperor never failed to seize, and
      to improve, every favorable circumstance. As long as the superior
      genius of Fritigern preserved the union, and directed the motions
      of the Barbarians, their power was not inadequate to the conquest
      of a great empire. The death of that hero, the predecessor and
      master of the renowned Alaric, relieved an impatient multitude
      from the intolerable yoke of discipline and discretion. The
      Barbarians, who had been restrained by his authority, abandoned
      themselves to the dictates of their passions; and their passions
      were seldom uniform or consistent. An army of conquerors was
      broken into many disorderly bands of savage robbers; and their
      blind and irregular fury was not less pernicious to themselves,
      than to their enemies. Their mischievous disposition was shown in
      the destruction of every object which they wanted strength to
      remove, or taste to enjoy; and they often consumed, with
      improvident rage, the harvests, or the granaries, which soon
      afterwards became necessary for their own subsistence. A spirit
      of discord arose among the independent tribes and nations, which
      had been united only by the bands of a loose and voluntary
      alliance. The troops of the Huns and the Alani would naturally
      upbraid the flight of the Goths; who were not disposed to use
      with moderation the advantages of their fortune; the ancient
      jealousy of the Ostrogoths and the Visigoths could not long be
      suspended; and the haughty chiefs still remembered the insults
      and injuries, which they had reciprocally offered, or sustained,
      while the nation was seated in the countries beyond the Danube.
      The progress of domestic faction abated the more diffusive
      sentiment of national animosity; and the officers of Theodosius
      were instructed to purchase, with liberal gifts and promises, the
      retreat or service of the discontented party. The acquisition of
      Modar, a prince of the royal blood of the Amali, gave a bold and
      faithful champion to the cause of Rome. The illustrious deserter
      soon obtained the rank of master-general, with an important
      command; surprised an army of his countrymen, who were immersed
      in wine and sleep; and, after a cruel slaughter of the astonished
      Goths, returned with an immense spoil, and four thousand wagons,
      to the Imperial camp. 120 In the hands of a skilful politician,
      the most different means may be successfully applied to the same
      ends; and the peace of the empire, which had been forwarded by
      the divisions, was accomplished by the reunion, of the Gothic
      nation. Athanaric, who had been a patient spectator of these
      extraordinary events, was at length driven, by the chance of
      arms, from the dark recesses of the woods of Caucaland. He no
      longer hesitated to pass the Danube; and a very considerable part
      of the subjects of Fritigern, who already felt the inconveniences
      of anarchy, were easily persuaded to acknowledge for their king a
      Gothic Judge, whose birth they respected, and whose abilities
      they had frequently experienced. But age had chilled the daring
      spirit of Athanaric; and, instead of leading his people to the
      field of battle and victory, he wisely listened to the fair
      proposal of an honorable and advantageous treaty. Theodosius, who
      was acquainted with the merit and power of his new ally,
      condescended to meet him at the distance of several miles from
      Constantinople; and entertained him in the Imperial city, with
      the confidence of a friend, and the magnificence of a monarch.
      ÒThe Barbarian prince observed, with curious attention, the
      variety of objects which attracted his notice, and at last broke
      out into a sincere and passionate exclamation of wonder. I now
      behold (said he) what I never could believe, the glories of this
      stupendous capital! And as he cast his eyes around, he viewed,
      and he admired, the commanding situation of the city, the
      strength and beauty of the walls and public edifices, the
      capacious harbor, crowded with innumerable vessels, the perpetual
      concourse of distant nations, and the arms and discipline of the
      troops. Indeed, (continued Athanaric,) the emperor of the Romans
      is a god upon earth; and the presumptuous man, who dares to lift
      his hand against him, is guilty of his own blood.Ó 121 The Gothic
      king did not long enjoy this splendid and honorable reception;
      and, as temperance was not the virtue of his nation, it may
      justly be suspected, that his mortal disease was contracted
      amidst the pleasures of the Imperial banquets. But the policy of
      Theodosius derived more solid benefit from the death, than he
      could have expected from the most faithful services, of his ally.
      The funeral of Athanaric was performed with solemn rites in the
      capital of the East; a stately monument was erected to his
      memory; and his whole army, won by the liberal courtesy, and
      decent grief, of Theodosius, enlisted under the standard of the
      Roman empire. 122 The submission of so great a body of the
      Visigoths was productive of the most salutary consequences; and
      the mixed influence of force, of reason, and of corruption,
      became every day more powerful, and more extensive. Each
      independent chieftain hastened to obtain a separate treaty, from
      the apprehension that an obstinate delay might expose _him_,
      alone and unprotected, to the revenge, or justice, of the
      conqueror. The general, or rather the final, capitulation of the
      Goths, may be dated four years, one month, and twenty-five days,
      after the defeat and death of the emperor Valens. 123

      119 (return) [ Compare Themistius (Orat, xiv. p. 181) with
      Zosimus (l. iv. p. 232,) Jornandes, (c. xxvii. p. 649,) and the
      prolix Commentary of M. de Buat, (Hist. de Peuples, &c., tom. vi.
      p. 477Ñ552.) The Chronicles of Idatius and Marcellinus allude, in
      general terms, to magna certamina, _magna multaque_ pr¾lia. The
      two epithets are not easily reconciled.]

      120 (return) [ Zosimus (l. iv. p. 232) styles him a Scythian, a
      name which the more recent Greeks seem to have appropriated to
      the Goths.]

      121 (return) [ The reader will not be displeased to see the
      original words of Jornandes, or the author whom he transcribed.
      Regiam urbem ingressus est, miransque, En, inquit, cerno quod
      s¾pe incredulus audiebam, famam videlicet tant¾ urbis. Et huc
      illuc oculos volvens, nunc situm urbis, commeatumque navium, nunc
      mÏnia clara pro spectans, miratur; populosque diversarum gentium,
      quasi fonte in uno e diversis partibus scaturiente unda, sic
      quoque militem ordinatum aspiciens; Deus, inquit, sine dubio est
      terrenus Imperator, et quisquis adversus eum manum moverit, ipse
      sui sanguinis reus existit Jornandes (c. xxviii. p. 650) proceeds
      to mention his death and funeral.]

      122 (return) [ Jornandes, c. xxviii. p. 650. Even Zosimus (l. v.
      p. 246) is compelled to approve the generosity of Theodosius, so
      honorable to himself, and so beneficial to the public.]

      123 (return) [ The short, but authentic, hints in the _Fasti_ of
      Idatius (Chron. Scaliger. p. 52) are stained with contemporary
      passion. The fourteenth oration of Themistius is a compliment to
      Peace, and the consul Saturninus, (A.D. 383.)]

      The provinces of the Danube had been already relieved from the
      oppressive weight of the Gruthungi, or Ostrogoths, by the
      voluntary retreat of Alatheus and Saphrax, whose restless spirit
      had prompted them to seek new scenes of rapine and glory. Their
      destructive course was pointed towards the West; but we must be
      satisfied with a very obscure and imperfect knowledge of their
      various adventures. The Ostrogoths impelled several of the German
      tribes on the provinces of Gaul; concluded, and soon violated, a
      treaty with the emperor Gratian; advanced into the unknown
      countries of the North; and, after an interval of more than four
      years, returned, with accumulated force, to the banks of the
      Lower Danube. Their troops were recruited with the fiercest
      warriors of Germany and Scythia; and the soldiers, or at least
      the historians, of the empire, no longer recognized the name and
      countenances of their former enemies. 124 The general who
      commanded the military and naval powers of the Thracian frontier,
      soon perceived that his superiority would be disadvantageous to
      the public service; and that the Barbarians, awed by the presence
      of his fleet and legions, would probably defer the passage of the
      river till the approaching winter. The dexterity of the spies,
      whom he sent into the Gothic camp, allured the Barbarians into a
      fatal snare. They were persuaded that, by a bold attempt, they
      might surprise, in the silence and darkness of the night, the
      sleeping army of the Romans; and the whole multitude was hastily
      embarked in a fleet of three thousand canoes. 125 The bravest of
      the Ostrogoths led the van; the main body consisted of the
      remainder of their subjects and soldiers; and the women and
      children securely followed in the rear. One of the nights without
      a moon had been selected for the execution of their design; and
      they had almost reached the southern bank of the Danube, in the
      firm confidence that they should find an easy landing and an
      unguarded camp. But the progress of the Barbarians was suddenly
      stopped by an unexpected obstacle a triple line of vessels,
      strongly connected with each other, and which formed an
      impenetrable chain of two miles and a half along the river. While
      they struggled to force their way in the unequal conflict, their
      right flank was overwhelmed by the irresistible attack of a fleet
      of galleys, which were urged down the stream by the united
      impulse of oars and of the tide. The weight and velocity of those
      ships of war broke, and sunk, and dispersed, the rude and feeble
      canoes of the Barbarians; their valor was ineffectual; and
      Alatheus, the king, or general, of the Ostrogoths, perished with
      his bravest troops, either by the sword of the Romans, or in the
      waves of the Danube. The last division of this unfortunate fleet
      might regain the opposite shore; but the distress and disorder of
      the multitude rendered them alike incapable, either of action or
      counsel; and they soon implored the clemency of the victorious
      enemy. On this occasion, as well as on many others, it is a
      difficult task to reconcile the passions and prejudices of the
      writers of the age of Theodosius. The partial and malignant
      historian, who misrepresents every action of his reign, affirms,
      that the emperor did not appear in the field of battle till the
      Barbarians had been vanquished by the valor and conduct of his
      lieutenant Promotus. 126 The flattering poet, who celebrated, in
      the court of Honorius, the glory of the father and of the son,
      ascribes the victory to the personal prowess of Theodosius; and
      almost insinuates, that the king of the Ostrogoths was slain by
      the hand of the emperor. 127 The truth of history might perhaps
      be found in a just medium between these extreme and contradictory
      assertions.

      124 (return) [ Zosimus, l. iv. p. 252.]

      125 (return) [ I am justified, by reason and example, in applying
      this Indian name to the the Barbarians, the single trees hollowed
      into the shape of a boat. Zosimus, l. iv. p. 253. Ausi Danubium
      quondam tranare Gruthungi In lintres fregere nemus: ter mille
      ruebant Per fluvium plen¾ cuneis immanibus alni. Claudian, in iv.
      Cols. Hon. 623.]

      126 (return) [ Zosimus, l. iv. p. 252Ñ255. He too frequently
      betrays his poverty of judgment by disgracing the most serious
      narratives with trifling and incredible circumstances.]

      127 (return) [ÑOdoth¾i Regis _opima_ RetulitÑVer. 632. The
      _opima_ were the spoils which a Roman general could only win from
      the king, or general, of the enemy, whom he had slain with his
      own hands: and no more than three such examples are celebrated in
      the victorious ages of Rome.]

      The original treaty which fixed the settlement of the Goths,
      ascertained their privileges, and stipulated their obligations,
      would illustrate the history of Theodosius and his successors.
      The series of their history has imperfectly preserved the spirit
      and substance of this single agreement. 128 The ravages of war
      and tyranny had provided many large tracts of fertile but
      uncultivated land for the use of those Barbarians who might not
      disdain the practice of agriculture. A numerous colony of the
      Visigoths was seated in Thrace; the remains of the Ostrogoths
      were planted in Phrygia and Lydia; their immediate wants were
      supplied by a distribution of corn and cattle; and their future
      industry was encouraged by an exemption from tribute, during a
      certain term of years. The Barbarians would have deserved to feel
      the cruel and perfidious policy of the Imperial court, if they
      had suffered themselves to be dispersed through the provinces.
      They required, and they obtained, the sole possession of the
      villages and districts assigned for their residence; they still
      cherished and propagated their native manners and language;
      asserted, in the bosom of despotism, the freedom of their
      domestic government; and acknowledged the sovereignty of the
      emperor, without submitting to the inferior jurisdiction of the
      laws and magistrates of Rome. The hereditary chiefs of the tribes
      and families were still permitted to command their followers in
      peace and war; but the royal dignity was abolished; and the
      generals of the Goths were appointed and removed at the pleasure
      of the emperor. An army of forty thousand Goths was maintained
      for the perpetual service of the empire of the East; and those
      haughty troops, who assumed the title of _F¾derati_, or allies,
      were distinguished by their gold collars, liberal pay, and
      licentious privileges. Their native courage was improved by the
      use of arms and the knowledge of discipline; and, while the
      republic was guarded, or threatened, by the doubtful sword of the
      Barbarians, the last sparks of the military flame were finally
      extinguished in the minds of the Romans. 129 Theodosius had the
      address to persuade his allies, that the conditions of peace,
      which had been extorted from him by prudence and necessity, were
      the voluntary expressions of his sincere friendship for the
      Gothic nation. 130 A different mode of vindication or apology was
      opposed to the complaints of the people; who loudly censured
      these shameful and dangerous concessions. 131 The calamities of
      the war were painted in the most lively colors; and the first
      symptoms of the return of order, of plenty, and security, were
      diligently exaggerated. The advocates of Theodosius could affirm,
      with some appearance of truth and reason, that it was impossible
      to extirpate so many warlike tribes, who were rendered desperate
      by the loss of their native country; and that the exhausted
      provinces would be revived by a fresh supply of soldiers and
      husbandmen. The Barbarians still wore an angry and hostile
      aspect; but the experience of past times might encourage the
      hope, that they would acquire the habits of industry and
      obedience; that their manners would be polished by time,
      education, and the influence of Christianity; and that their
      posterity would insensibly blend with the great body of the Roman
      people. 132

      128 (return) [ See Themistius, Orat. xvi. p. 211. Claudian (in
      Eutrop. l. ii. 112) mentions the Phrygian colony:ÑÑOstrogothis
      colitur mistisque Gruthungis Phyrx agerÑÑand then proceeds to
      name the rivers of Lydia, the Pactolus, and Herreus.]

      129 (return) [ Compare Jornandes, (c. xx. 27,) who marks the
      condition and number of the Gothic _F¾derati_, with Zosimus, (l.
      iv. p. 258,) who mentions their golden collars; and Pacatus, (in
      Panegyr. Vet. xii. 37,) who applauds, with false or foolish joy,
      their bravery and discipline.]

      130 (return) [ Amator pacis generisque Gothorum, is the praise
      bestowed by the Gothic historian, (c. xxix.,) who represents his
      nation as innocent, peaceable men, slow to anger, and patient of
      injuries. According to Livy, the Romans conquered the world in
      their own defence.]

      131 (return) [ Besides the partial invectives of Zosimus, (always
      discontented with the Christian reigns,) see the grave
      representations which Synesius addresses to the emperor Arcadius,
      (de Regno, p. 25, 26, edit. Petav.) The philosophic bishop of
      Cyrene was near enough to judge; and he was sufficiently removed
      from the temptation of fear or flattery.]

      132 (return) [ Themistius (Orat. xvi. p. 211, 212) composes an
      elaborate and rational apology, which is not, however, exempt
      from the puerilities of Greek rhetoric. Orpheus could _only_
      charm the wild beasts of Thrace; but Theodosius enchanted the men
      and women, whose predecessors in the same country had torn
      Orpheus in pieces, &c.]

      Notwithstanding these specious arguments, and these sanguine
      expectations, it was apparent to every discerning eye, that the
      Goths would long remain the enemies, and might soon become the
      conquerors of the Roman empire. Their rude and insolent behavior
      expressed their contempt of the citizens and provincials, whom
      they insulted with impunity. 133 To the zeal and valor of the
      Barbarians Theodosius was indebted for the success of his arms:
      but their assistance was precarious; and they were sometimes
      seduced, by a treacherous and inconstant disposition, to abandon
      his standard, at the moment when their service was the most
      essential. During the civil war against Maximus, a great number
      of Gothic deserters retired into the morasses of Macedonia,
      wasted the adjacent provinces, and obliged the intrepid monarch
      to expose his person, and exert his power, to suppress the rising
      flame of rebellion. 134 The public apprehensions were fortified
      by the strong suspicion, that these tumults were not the effect
      of accidental passion, but the result of deep and premeditated
      design. It was generally believed, that the Goths had signed the
      treaty of peace with a hostile and insidious spirit; and that
      their chiefs had previously bound themselves, by a solemn and
      secret oath, never to keep faith with the Romans; to maintain the
      fairest show of loyalty and friendship, and to watch the
      favorable moment of rapine, of conquest, and of revenge. But as
      the minds of the Barbarians were not insensible to the power of
      gratitude, several of the Gothic leaders sincerely devoted
      themselves to the service of the empire, or, at least, of the
      emperor; the whole nation was insensibly divided into two
      opposite factions, and much sophistry was employed in
      conversation and dispute, to compare the obligations of their
      first, and second, engagements. The Goths, who considered
      themselves as the friends of peace, of justice, and of Rome, were
      directed by the authority of Fravitta, a valiant and honorable
      youth, distinguished above the rest of his countrymen by the
      politeness of his manners, the liberality of his sentiments, and
      the mild virtues of social life. But the more numerous faction
      adhered to the fierce and faithless Priulf, 13411 who inflamed
      the passions, and asserted the independence, of his warlike
      followers. On one of the solemn festivals, when the chiefs of
      both parties were invited to the Imperial table, they were
      insensibly heated by wine, till they forgot the usual restraints
      of discretion and respect, and betrayed, in the presence of
      Theodosius, the fatal secret of their domestic disputes. The
      emperor, who had been the reluctant witness of this extraordinary
      controversy, dissembled his fears and resentment, and soon
      dismissed the tumultuous assembly. Fravitta, alarmed and
      exasperated by the insolence of his rival, whose departure from
      the palace might have been the signal of a civil war, boldly
      followed him; and, drawing his sword, laid Priulf dead at his
      feet. Their companions flew to arms; and the faithful champion of
      Rome would have been oppressed by superior numbers, if he had not
      been protected by the seasonable interposition of the Imperial
      guards. 135 Such were the scenes of Barbaric rage, which
      disgraced the palace and table of the Roman emperor; and, as the
      impatient Goths could only be restrained by the firm and
      temperate character of Theodosius, the public safety seemed to
      depend on the life and abilities of a single man. 136

      133 (return) [ Constantinople was deprived half a day of the
      public allowance of bread, to expiate the murder of a Gothic
      soldier: was the guilt of the people. Libanius, Orat. xii. p.
      394, edit. Morel.]

      134 (return) [ Zosimus, l. iv. p. 267-271. He tells a long and
      ridiculous story of the adventurous prince, who roved the country
      with only five horsemen, of a spy whom they detected, whipped,
      and killed in an old womanÕs cottage, &c.]

      13411 (return) [ Eunapius.ÑM.]

      135 (return) [ Compare Eunapius (in Excerpt. Legat. p. 21, 22)
      with Zosimus, (l. iv. p. 279.) The difference of circumstances
      and names must undoubtedly be applied to the same story.
      Fravitta, or Travitta, was afterwards consul, (A.D. 401.) and
      still continued his faithful services to the eldest son of
      Theodosius. (Tillemont, Hist. des Empereurs, tom. v. p. 467.)]

      136 (return) [ Les Goths ravagerent tout depuis le Danube
      jusquÕau Bosphore; exterminerent Valens et son armŽe; et ne
      repasserent le Danube, que pour abandonner lÕaffreuse solitude
      quÕils avoient faite, (Îuvres de Montesquieu, tom. iii. p. 479.
      Considerations sur les _Causes_ de la Grandeur et de la DŽcadence
      des Romains, c. xvii.) The president Montesquieu seems ignorant
      that the Goths, after the defeat of Valens, _never_ abandoned the
      Roman territory. It is now thirty years, says Claudian, (de Bello
      Getico, 166, &c., A.D. 404,) Ex quo jam patrios gens h¾c oblita
      Triones, Atque Istrum transvecta semel, vestigia fixit Threicio
      funesta soloÑthe error is inexcusable; since it disguises the
      principal and immediate cause of the fall of the Western empire
      of Rome.]




VOLUME THREE




      