Chapter IV: The Cruelty, Follies And Murder Of Commodus.—Part I.

     The Cruelty, Follies, And Murder Of Commodus—Election Of
     Pertinax—His Attempts To Reform The State—His Assassination By The
     Prætorian Guards.

      The mildness of Marcus, which the rigid discipline of the Stoics
      was unable to eradicate, formed, at the same time, the most
      amiable, and the only defective part of his character. His
      excellent understanding was often deceived by the unsuspecting
      goodness of his heart. Artful men, who study the passions of
      princes, and conceal their own, approached his person in the
      disguise of philosophic sanctity, and acquired riches and honors
      by affecting to despise them. 1 His excessive indulgence to his
      brother, 105 his wife, and his son, exceeded the bounds of
      private virtue, and became a public injury, by the example and
      consequences of their vices.

      1 (return) [ See the complaints of Avidius Cassius, Hist. August.
      p. 45. These are, it is true, the complaints of faction; but even
      faction exaggerates, rather than invents.]

      105 (return) [ His brother by adoption, and his colleague, L.
      Verus. Marcus Aurelius had no other brother.—W.]

      Faustina, the daughter of Pius and the wife of Marcus, has been
      as much celebrated for her gallantries as for her beauty. The
      grave simplicity of the philosopher was ill calculated to engage
      her wanton levity, or to fix that unbounded passion for variety,
      which often discovered personal merit in the meanest of mankind.
      2 The Cupid of the ancients was, in general, a very sensual
      deity; and the amours of an empress, as they exact on her side
      the plainest advances, are seldom susceptible of much sentimental
      delicacy. Marcus was the only man in the empire who seemed
      ignorant or insensible of the irregularities of Faustina; which,
      according to the prejudices of every age, reflected some disgrace
      on the injured husband. He promoted several of her lovers to
      posts of honor and profit, 3 and during a connection of thirty
      years, invariably gave her proofs of the most tender confidence,
      and of a respect which ended not with her life. In his
      Meditations, he thanks the gods, who had bestowed on him a wife
      so faithful, so gentle, and of such a wonderful simplicity of
      manners. 4 The obsequious senate, at his earnest request,
      declared her a goddess. She was represented in her temples, with
      the attributes of Juno, Venus, and Ceres; and it was decreed,
      that, on the day of their nuptials, the youth of either sex
      should pay their vows before the altar of their chaste patroness.
      5

      2 (return) [ Faustinam satis constat apud Cajetam conditiones
      sibi et nauticas et gladiatorias, elegisse. Hist. August. p. 30.
      Lampridius explains the sort of merit which Faustina chose, and
      the conditions which she exacted. Hist. August. p. 102.]

      3 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 34.]

      4 (return) [ Meditat. l. i. The world has laughed at the
      credulity of Marcus but Madam Dacier assures us, (and we may
      credit a lady,) that the husband will always be deceived, if the
      wife condescends to dissemble.]

      5 (return) [Footnote 5: Dion Cassius, l. lxxi. [c. 31,] p. 1195.
      Hist. August. p. 33. Commentaire de Spanheim sur les Cæsars de
      Julien, p. 289. The deification of Faustina is the only defect
      which Julian’s criticism is able to discover in the
      all-accomplished character of Marcus.]

      The monstrous vices of the son have cast a shade on the purity of
      the father’s virtues. It has been objected to Marcus, that he
      sacrificed the happiness of millions to a fond partiality for a
      worthless boy; and that he chose a successor in his own family,
      rather than in the republic. Nothing however, was neglected by
      the anxious father, and by the men of virtue and learning whom he
      summoned to his assistance, to expand the narrow mind of young
      Commodus, to correct his growing vices, and to render him worthy
      of the throne for which he was designed. But the power of
      instruction is seldom of much efficacy, except in those happy
      dispositions where it is almost superfluous. The distasteful
      lesson of a grave philosopher was, in a moment, obliterated by
      the whisper of a profligate favorite; and Marcus himself blasted
      the fruits of this labored education, by admitting his son, at
      the age of fourteen or fifteen, to a full participation of the
      Imperial power. He lived but four years afterwards: but he lived
      long enough to repent a rash measure, which raised the impetuous
      youth above the restraint of reason and authority.

      Most of the crimes which disturb the internal peace of society,
      are produced by the restraints which the necessary but unequal
      laws of property have imposed on the appetites of mankind, by
      confining to a few the possession of those objects that are
      coveted by many. Of all our passions and appetites, the love of
      power is of the most imperious and unsociable nature, since the
      pride of one man requires the submission of the multitude. In the
      tumult of civil discord, the laws of society lose their force,
      and their place is seldom supplied by those of humanity. The
      ardor of contention, the pride of victory, the despair of
      success, the memory of past injuries, and the fear of future
      dangers, all contribute to inflame the mind, and to silence the
      voice of pity. From such motives almost every page of history has
      been stained with civil blood; but these motives will not account
      for the unprovoked cruelties of Commodus, who had nothing to wish
      and every thing to enjoy. The beloved son of Marcus succeeded to
      his father, amidst the acclamations of the senate and armies; 6
      and when he ascended the throne, the happy youth saw round him
      neither competitor to remove, nor enemies to punish. In this
      calm, elevated station, it was surely natural that he should
      prefer the love of mankind to their detestation, the mild glories
      of his five predecessors to the ignominious fate of Nero and
      Domitian.

      6 (return) [ Commodus was the first _Porphyrogenitus_, (born
      since his father’s accession to the throne.) By a new strain of
      flattery, the Egyptian medals date by the years of his life; as
      if they were synonymous to those of his reign. Tillemont, Hist.
      des Empereurs, tom. ii. p. 752.]

      Yet Commodus was not, as he has been represented, a tiger born
      with an insatiate thirst of human blood, and capable, from his
      infancy, of the most inhuman actions. 7 Nature had formed him of
      a weak rather than a wicked disposition. His simplicity and
      timidity rendered him the slave of his attendants, who gradually
      corrupted his mind. His cruelty, which at first obeyed the
      dictates of others, degenerated into habit, and at length became
      the ruling passion of his soul. 8

      7 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 46.]

      8 (return) [ Dion Cassius, l. lxxii. p. 1203.]

      Upon the death of his father, Commodus found himself embarrassed
      with the command of a great army, and the conduct of a difficult
      war against the Quadi and Marcomanni. 9 The servile and
      profligate youths whom Marcus had banished, soon regained their
      station and influence about the new emperor. They exaggerated the
      hardships and dangers of a campaign in the wild countries beyond
      the Danube; and they assured the indolent prince that the terror
      of his name, and the arms of his lieutenants, would be sufficient
      to complete the conquest of the dismayed barbarians, or to impose
      such conditions as were more advantageous than any conquest. By a
      dexterous application to his sensual appetites, they compared the
      tranquillity, the splendor, the refined pleasures of Rome, with
      the tumult of a Pannonian camp, which afforded neither leisure
      nor materials for luxury. 10 Commodus listened to the pleasing
      advice; but whilst he hesitated between his own inclination and
      the awe which he still retained for his father’s counsellors, the
      summer insensibly elapsed, and his triumphal entry into the
      capital was deferred till the autumn. His graceful person, 11
      popular address, and imagined virtues, attracted the public
      favor; the honorable peace which he had recently granted to the
      barbarians, diffused a universal joy; 12 his impatience to
      revisit Rome was fondly ascribed to the love of his country; and
      his dissolute course of amusements was faintly condemned in a
      prince of nineteen years of age.

      9 (return) [ According to Tertullian, (Apolog. c. 25,) he died at
      Sirmium. But the situation of Vindobona, or Vienna, where both
      the Victors place his death, is better adapted to the operations
      of the war against the Marcomanni and Quadi.]

      10 (return) [ Herodian, l. i. p. 12.]

      11 (return) [ Herodian, l. i. p. 16.]

      12 (return) [ This universal joy is well described (from the
      medals as well as historians) by Mr. Wotton, Hist. of Rome, p.
      192, 193.] During the three first years of his reign, the forms,
      and even the spirit, of the old administration, were maintained
      by those faithful counsellors, to whom Marcus had recommended his
      son, and for whose wisdom and integrity Commodus still
      entertained a reluctant esteem. The young prince and his
      profligate favorites revelled in all the license of sovereign
      power; but his hands were yet unstained with blood; and he had
      even displayed a generosity of sentiment, which might perhaps
      have ripened into solid virtue. 13 A fatal incident decided his
      fluctuating character.

      13 (return) [ Manilius, the confidential secretary of Avidius
      Cassius, was discovered after he had lain concealed several
      years. The emperor nobly relieved the public anxiety by refusing
      to see him, and burning his papers without opening them. Dion
      Cassius, l. lxxii. p. 1209.]

      One evening, as the emperor was returning to the palace, through
      a dark and narrow portico in the amphitheatre, 14 an assassin,
      who waited his passage, rushed upon him with a drawn sword,
      loudly exclaiming, “_The senate sends you this_.” The menace
      prevented the deed; the assassin was seized by the guards, and
      immediately revealed the authors of the conspiracy. It had been
      formed, not in the state, but within the walls of the palace.
      Lucilla, the emperor’s sister, and widow of Lucius Verus,
      impatient of the second rank, and jealous of the reigning
      empress, had armed the murderer against her brother’s life. She
      had not ventured to communicate the black design to her second
      husband, Claudius Pompeiarus, a senator of distinguished merit
      and unshaken loyalty; but among the crowd of her lovers (for she
      imitated the manners of Faustina) she found men of desperate
      fortunes and wild ambition, who were prepared to serve her more
      violent, as well as her tender passions. The conspirators
      experienced the rigor of justice, and the abandoned princess was
      punished, first with exile, and afterwards with death. 15

      14 (return) [See Maffei degli Amphitheatri, p. 126.]

      15 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxi. p. 1205 Herodian, l. i. p. 16 Hist.
      August p. 46.]

      But the words of the assassin sunk deep into the mind of
      Commodus, and left an indelible impression of fear and hatred
      against the whole body of the senate. 151 Those whom he had
      dreaded as importunate ministers, he now suspected as secret
      enemies. The Delators, a race of men discouraged, and almost
      extinguished, under the former reigns, again became formidable,
      as soon as they discovered that the emperor was desirous of
      finding disaffection and treason in the senate. That assembly,
      whom Marcus had ever considered as the great council of the
      nation, was composed of the most distinguished of the Romans; and
      distinction of every kind soon became criminal. The possession of
      wealth stimulated the diligence of the informers; rigid virtue
      implied a tacit censure of the irregularities of Commodus;
      important services implied a dangerous superiority of merit; and
      the friendship of the father always insured the aversion of the
      son. Suspicion was equivalent to proof; trial to condemnation.
      The execution of a considerable senator was attended with the
      death of all who might lament or revenge his fate; and when
      Commodus had once tasted human blood, he became incapable of pity
      or remorse.

      151 (return) [ The conspirators were senators, even the assassin
      himself. Herod. 81.—G.]

      Of these innocent victims of tyranny, none died more lamented
      than the two brothers of the Quintilian family, Maximus and
      Condianus; whose fraternal love has saved their names from
      oblivion, and endeared their memory to posterity. Their studies
      and their occupations, their pursuits and their pleasures, were
      still the same. In the enjoyment of a great estate, they never
      admitted the idea of a separate interest: some fragments are now
      extant of a treatise which they composed in common; 152 and in
      every action of life it was observed that their two bodies were
      animated by one soul. The Antonines, who valued their virtues,
      and delighted in their union, raised them, in the same year, to
      the consulship; and Marcus afterwards intrusted to their joint
      care the civil administration of Greece, and a great military
      command, in which they obtained a signal victory over the
      Germans. The kind cruelty of Commodus united them in death. 16

      152 (return) [ This work was on agriculture, and is often quoted
      by later writers. See P. Needham, Proleg. ad Geoponic. Camb.
      1704.—W.]

      16 (return) [ In a note upon the Augustan History, Casaubon has
      collected a number of particulars concerning these celebrated
      brothers. See p. 96 of his learned commentary.]

      The tyrant’s rage, after having shed the noblest blood of the
      senate, at length recoiled on the principal instrument of his
      cruelty. Whilst Commodus was immersed in blood and luxury, he
      devolved the detail of the public business on Perennis, a servile
      and ambitious minister, who had obtained his post by the murder
      of his predecessor, but who possessed a considerable share of
      vigor and ability. By acts of extortion, and the forfeited
      estates of the nobles sacrificed to his avarice, he had
      accumulated an immense treasure. The Prætorian guards were under
      his immediate command; and his son, who already discovered a
      military genius, was at the head of the Illyrian legions.
      Perennis aspired to the empire; or what, in the eyes of Commodus,
      amounted to the same crime, he was capable of aspiring to it, had
      he not been prevented, surprised, and put to death. The fall of a
      minister is a very trifling incident in the general history of
      the empire; but it was hastened by an extraordinary circumstance,
      which proved how much the nerves of discipline were already
      relaxed. The legions of Britain, discontented with the
      administration of Perennis, formed a deputation of fifteen
      hundred select men, with instructions to march to Rome, and lay
      their complaints before the emperor. These military petitioners,
      by their own determined behaviour, by inflaming the divisions of
      the guards, by exaggerating the strength of the British army, and
      by alarming the fears of Commodus, exacted and obtained the
      minister’s death, as the only redress of their grievances. 17
      This presumption of a distant army, and their discovery of the
      weakness of government, was a sure presage of the most dreadful
      convulsions.

      17 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxii. p. 1210. Herodian, l. i. p. 22.
      Hist. August. p. 48. Dion gives a much less odious character of
      Perennis, than the other historians. His moderation is almost a
      pledge of his veracity. Note: Gibbon praises Dion for the
      moderation with which he speaks of Perennis: he follows,
      nevertheless, in his own narrative, Herodian and Lampridius. Dion
      speaks of Perennis not only with moderation, but with admiration;
      he represents him as a great man, virtuous in his life, and
      blameless in his death: perhaps he may be suspected of
      partiality; but it is singular that Gibbon, having adopted, from
      Herodian and Lampridius, their judgment on this minister, follows
      Dion’s improbable account of his death. What likelihood, in fact,
      that fifteen hundred men should have traversed Gaul and Italy,
      and have arrived at Rome without any understanding with the
      Prætorians, or without detection or opposition from Perennis, the
      Prætorian præfect? Gibbon, foreseeing, perhaps, this difficulty,
      has added, that the military deputation inflamed the divisions of
      the guards; but Dion says expressly that they did not reach Rome,
      but that the emperor went out to meet them: he even reproaches
      him for not having opposed them with the guards, who were
      superior in number. Herodian relates that Commodus, having
      learned, from a soldier, the ambitious designs of Perennis and
      his son, caused them to be attacked and massacred by night.—G.
      from W. Dion’s narrative is remarkably circumstantial, and his
      authority higher than either of the other writers. He hints that
      Cleander, a new favorite, had already undermined the influence of
      Perennis.—M.]

      The negligence of the public administration was betrayed, soon
      afterwards, by a new disorder, which arose from the smallest
      beginnings. A spirit of desertion began to prevail among the
      troops: and the deserters, instead of seeking their safety in
      flight or concealment, infested the highways. Maternus, a private
      soldier, of a daring boldness above his station, collected these
      bands of robbers into a little army, set open the prisons,
      invited the slaves to assert their freedom, and plundered with
      impunity the rich and defenceless cities of Gaul and Spain. The
      governors of the provinces, who had long been the spectators, and
      perhaps the partners, of his depredations, were, at length,
      roused from their supine indolence by the threatening commands of
      the emperor. Maternus found that he was encompassed, and foresaw
      that he must be overpowered. A great effort of despair was his
      last resource. He ordered his followers to disperse, to pass the
      Alps in small parties and various disguises, and to assemble at
      Rome, during the licentious tumult of the festival of Cybele. 18
      To murder Commodus, and to ascend the vacant throne, was the
      ambition of no vulgar robber. His measures were so ably concerted
      that his concealed troops already filled the streets of Rome. The
      envy of an accomplice discovered and ruined this singular
      enterprise, in a moment when it was ripe for execution. 19

      18 (return) [ During the second Punic war, the Romans imported
      from Asia the worship of the mother of the gods. Her festival,
      the Megalesia, began on the fourth of April, and lasted six days.
      The streets were crowded with mad processions, the theatres with
      spectators, and the public tables with unbidden guests. Order and
      police were suspended, and pleasure was the only serious business
      of the city. See Ovid. de Fastis, l. iv. 189, &c.]

      19 (return) [ Herodian, l. i. p. 23, 23.]

      Suspicious princes often promote the last of mankind, from a vain
      persuasion, that those who have no dependence, except on their
      favor, will have no attachment, except to the person of their
      benefactor. Cleander, the successor of Perennis, was a Phrygian
      by birth; of a nation over whose stubborn, but servile temper,
      blows only could prevail. 20 He had been sent from his native
      country to Rome, in the capacity of a slave. As a slave he
      entered the Imperial palace, rendered himself useful to his
      master’s passions, and rapidly ascended to the most exalted
      station which a subject could enjoy. His influence over the mind
      of Commodus was much greater than that of his predecessor; for
      Cleander was devoid of any ability or virtue which could inspire
      the emperor with envy or distrust. Avarice was the reigning
      passion of his soul, and the great principle of his
      administration. The rank of Consul, of Patrician, of Senator, was
      exposed to public sale; and it would have been considered as
      disaffection, if any one had refused to purchase these empty and
      disgraceful honors with the greatest part of his fortune. 21 In
      the lucrative provincial employments, the minister shared with
      the governor the spoils of the people. The execution of the laws
      was penal and arbitrary. A wealthy criminal might obtain, not
      only the reversal of the sentence by which he was justly
      condemned, but might likewise inflict whatever punishment he
      pleased on the accuser, the witnesses, and the judge.

      20 (return) [ Cicero pro Flacco, c. 27.]

      21 (return) [ One of these dear-bought promotions occasioned a
      current... that Julius Solon was banished into the senate.]

      By these means, Cleander, in the space of three years, had
      accumulated more wealth than had ever yet been possessed by any
      freedman. 22 Commodus was perfectly satisfied with the
      magnificent presents which the artful courtier laid at his feet
      in the most seasonable moments. To divert the public envy,
      Cleander, under the emperor’s name, erected baths, porticos, and
      places of exercise, for the use of the people. 23 He flattered
      himself that the Romans, dazzled and amused by this apparent
      liberality, would be less affected by the bloody scenes which
      were daily exhibited; that they would forget the death of
      Byrrhus, a senator to whose superior merit the late emperor had
      granted one of his daughters; and that they would forgive the
      execution of Arrius Antoninus, the last representative of the
      name and virtues of the Antonines. The former, with more
      integrity than prudence, had attempted to disclose, to his
      brother-in-law, the true character of Cleander. An equitable
      sentence pronounced by the latter, when proconsul of Asia,
      against a worthless creature of the favorite, proved fatal to
      him. 24 After the fall of Perennis, the terrors of Commodus had,
      for a short time, assumed the appearance of a return to virtue.
      He repealed the most odious of his acts; loaded his memory with
      the public execration, and ascribed to the pernicious counsels of
      that wicked minister all the errors of his inexperienced youth.
      But his repentance lasted only thirty days; and, under Cleander’s
      tyranny, the administration of Perennis was often regretted.

      22 (return) [ Dion (l. lxxii. p. 12, 13) observes, that no
      freedman had possessed riches equal to those of Cleander. The
      fortune of Pallas amounted, however, to upwards of five and
      twenty hundred thousand pounds; Ter millies.]

      23 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxii. p. 12, 13. Herodian, l. i. p. 29.
      Hist. August. p. 52. These baths were situated near the Porta
      Capena. See Nardini Roma Antica, p. 79.]

      24 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 79.]




      Chapter IV: The Cruelty, Follies And Murder Of Commodus.—Part II.

      Pestilence and famine contributed to fill up the measure of the
      calamities of Rome. 25 The first could be only imputed to the
      just indignation of the gods; but a monopoly of corn, supported
      by the riches and power of the minister, was considered as the
      immediate cause of the second. The popular discontent, after it
      had long circulated in whispers, broke out in the assembled
      circus. The people quitted their favorite amusements for the more
      delicious pleasure of revenge, rushed in crowds towards a palace
      in the suburbs, one of the emperor’s retirements, and demanded,
      with angry clamors, the head of the public enemy. Cleander, who
      commanded the Prætorian guards, 26 ordered a body of cavalry to
      sally forth, and disperse the seditious multitude. The multitude
      fled with precipitation towards the city; several were slain, and
      many more were trampled to death; but when the cavalry entered
      the streets, their pursuit was checked by a shower of stones and
      darts from the roofs and windows of the houses. The foot guards,
      27 who had been long jealous of the prerogatives and insolence of
      the Prætorian cavalry, embraced the party of the people. The
      tumult became a regular engagement, and threatened a general
      massacre. The Prætorians, at length, gave way, oppressed with
      numbers; and the tide of popular fury returned with redoubled
      violence against the gates of the palace, where Commodus lay,
      dissolved in luxury, and alone unconscious of the civil war. It
      was death to approach his person with the unwelcome news. He
      would have perished in this supine security, had not two women,
      his eldest sister Fadilla, and Marcia, the most favored of his
      concubines, ventured to break into his presence. Bathed in tears,
      and with dishevelled hair, they threw themselves at his feet; and
      with all the pressing eloquence of fear, discovered to the
      affrighted emperor the crimes of the minister, the rage of the
      people, and the impending ruin, which, in a few minutes, would
      burst over his palace and person. Commodus started from his dream
      of pleasure, and commanded that the head of Cleander should be
      thrown out to the people. The desired spectacle instantly
      appeased the tumult; and the son of Marcus might even yet have
      regained the affection and confidence of his subjects. 28

      25 (return) [ Herodian, l. i. p. 28. Dion, l. lxxii. p. 1215. The
      latter says that two thousand persons died every day at Rome,
      during a considerable length of time.]

      26 (return) [ Tuneque primum tres præfecti prætorio fuere: inter
      quos libertinus. From some remains of modesty, Cleander declined
      the title, whilst he assumed the powers, of Prætorian præfect. As
      the other freedmen were styled, from their several departments, a
      rationibus, ab epistolis, Cleander called himself a pugione, as
      intrusted with the defence of his master’s person. Salmasius and
      Casaubon seem to have talked very idly upon this passage. * Note:
      M. Guizot denies that Lampridius means Cleander as præfect a
      pugione. The Libertinus seems to me to mean him.—M.]

      27 (return) [ Herodian, l. i. p. 31. It is doubtful whether he
      means the Prætorian infantry, or the cohortes urbanæ, a body of
      six thousand men, but whose rank and discipline were not equal to
      their numbers. Neither Tillemont nor Wotton choose to decide this
      question.]

      28 (return) [ Dion Cassius, l. lxxii. p. 1215. Herodian, l. i. p.
      32. Hist. August. p. 48.]

      But every sentiment of virtue and humanity was extinct in the
      mind of Commodus. Whilst he thus abandoned the reins of empire to
      these unworthy favorites, he valued nothing in sovereign power,
      except the unbounded license of indulging his sensual appetites.
      His hours were spent in a seraglio of three hundred beautiful
      women, and as many boys, of every rank, and of every province;
      and, wherever the arts of seduction proved ineffectual, the
      brutal lover had recourse to violence. The ancient historians 29
      have expatiated on these abandoned scenes of prostitution, which
      scorned every restraint of nature or modesty; but it would not be
      easy to translate their too faithful descriptions into the
      decency of modern language. The intervals of lust were filled up
      with the basest amusements. The influence of a polite age, and
      the labor of an attentive education, had never been able to
      infuse into his rude and brutish mind the least tincture of
      learning; and he was the first of the Roman emperors totally
      devoid of taste for the pleasures of the understanding. Nero
      himself excelled, or affected to excel, in the elegant arts of
      music and poetry: nor should we despise his pursuits, had he not
      converted the pleasing relaxation of a leisure hour into the
      serious business and ambition of his life. But Commodus, from his
      earliest infancy, discovered an aversion to whatever was rational
      or liberal, and a fond attachment to the amusements of the
      populace; the sports of the circus and amphitheatre, the combats
      of gladiators, and the hunting of wild beasts. The masters in
      every branch of learning, whom Marcus provided for his son, were
      heard with inattention and disgust; whilst the Moors and
      Parthians, who taught him to dart the javelin and to shoot with
      the bow, found a disciple who delighted in his application, and
      soon equalled the most skilful of his instructors in the
      steadiness of the eye and the dexterity of the hand.

      29 (return) [ Sororibus suis constupratis. Ipsas concubinas suas
      sub oculis...stuprari jubebat. Nec irruentium in se juvenum
      carebat infamia, omni parte corporis atque ore in sexum utrumque
      pollutus. Hist. Aug. p. 47.]

      The servile crowd, whose fortune depended on their master’s
      vices, applauded these ignoble pursuits. The perfidious voice of
      flattery reminded him, that by exploits of the same nature, by
      the defeat of the Nemæan lion, and the slaughter of the wild boar
      of Erymanthus, the Grecian Hercules had acquired a place among
      the gods, and an immortal memory among men. They only forgot to
      observe, that, in the first ages of society, when the fiercer
      animals often dispute with man the possession of an unsettled
      country, a successful war against those savages is one of the
      most innocent and beneficial labors of heroism. In the civilized
      state of the Roman empire, the wild beasts had long since retired
      from the face of man, and the neighborhood of populous cities. To
      surprise them in their solitary haunts, and to transport them to
      Rome, that they might be slain in pomp by the hand of an emperor,
      was an enterprise equally ridiculous for the prince and
      oppressive for the people. 30 Ignorant of these distinctions,
      Commodus eagerly embraced the glorious resemblance, and styled
      himself (as we still read on his medals31) the _Roman Hercules_.
      311 The club and the lion’s hide were placed by the side of the
      throne, amongst the ensigns of sovereignty; and statues were
      erected, in which Commodus was represented in the character, and
      with the attributes, of the god, whose valor and dexterity he
      endeavored to emulate in the daily course of his ferocious
      amusements. 32

      30 (return) [ The African lions, when pressed by hunger, infested
      the open villages and cultivated country; and they infested them
      with impunity. The royal beast was reserved for the pleasures of
      the emperor and the capital; and the unfortunate peasant who
      killed one of them though in his own defence, incurred a very
      heavy penalty. This extraordinary game-law was mitigated by
      Honorius, and finally repealed by Justinian. Codex Theodos. tom.
      v. p. 92, et Comment Gothofred.]

      31 (return) [ Spanheim de Numismat. Dissertat. xii. tom. ii. p.
      493.]

      311 (return) [ Commodus placed his own head on the colossal
      statue of Hercules with the inscription, Lucius Commodus
      Hercules. The wits of Rome, according to a new fragment of Dion,
      published an epigram, of which, like many other ancient jests,
      the point is not very clear. It seems to be a protest of the god
      against being confounded with the emperor. Mai Fragm. Vatican.
      ii. 225.—M.]

      32 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxii. p. 1216. Hist. August. p. 49.]

      Elated with these praises, which gradually extinguished the
      innate sense of shame, Commodus resolved to exhibit before the
      eyes of the Roman people those exercises, which till then he had
      decently confined within the walls of his palace, and to the
      presence of a few favorites. On the appointed day, the various
      motives of flattery, fear, and curiosity, attracted to the
      amphitheatre an innumerable multitude of spectators; and some
      degree of applause was deservedly bestowed on the uncommon skill
      of the Imperial performer. Whether he aimed at the head or heart
      of the animal, the wound was alike certain and mortal. With
      arrows whose point was shaped into the form of crescent, Commodus
      often intercepted the rapid career, and cut asunder the long,
      bony neck of the ostrich. 33 A panther was let loose; and the
      archer waited till he had leaped upon a trembling malefactor. In
      the same instant the shaft flew, the beast dropped dead, and the
      man remained unhurt. The dens of the amphitheatre disgorged at
      once a hundred lions: a hundred darts from the unerring hand of
      Commodus laid them dead as they run raging round the _Arena_.
      Neither the huge bulk of the elephant, nor the scaly hide of the
      rhinoceros, could defend them from his stroke. Æthiopia and India
      yielded their most extraordinary productions; and several animals
      were slain in the amphitheatre, which had been seen only in the
      representations of art, or perhaps of fancy. 34 In all these
      exhibitions, the securest precautions were used to protect the
      person of the Roman Hercules from the desperate spring of any
      savage, who might possibly disregard the dignity of the emperor
      and the sanctity of the god. 35

      33 (return) [ The ostrich’s neck is three feet long, and composed
      of seventeen vertebræ. See Buffon, Hist. Naturelle.]

      34 (return) [ Commodus killed a camelopardalis or Giraffe, (Dion,
      l. lxxii. p. 1211,) the tallest, the most gentle, and the most
      useless of the large quadrupeds. This singular animal, a native
      only of the interior parts of Africa, has not been seen in Europe
      since the revival of letters; and though M. de Buffon (Hist.
      Naturelle, tom. xiii.) has endeavored to describe, he has not
      ventured to delineate, the Giraffe. * Note: The naturalists of
      our days have been more fortunate. London probably now contains
      more specimens of this animal than have been seen in Europe since
      the fall of the Roman empire, unless in the pleasure gardens of
      the emperor Frederic II., in Sicily, which possessed several.
      Frederic’s collections of wild beasts were exhibited, for the
      popular amusement, in many parts of Italy. Raumer, Geschichte der
      Hohenstaufen, v. iii. p. 571. Gibbon, moreover, is mistaken; as a
      giraffe was presented to Lorenzo de Medici, either by the sultan
      of Egypt or the king of Tunis. Contemporary authorities are
      quoted in the old work, Gesner de Quadrupedibum p. 162.—M.]

      35 (return) [ Herodian, l. i. p. 37. Hist. August. p. 50.]

      But the meanest of the populace were affected with shame and
      indignation when they beheld their sovereign enter the lists as a
      gladiator, and glory in a profession which the laws and manners
      of the Romans had branded with the justest note of infamy. 36 He
      chose the habit and arms of the _Secutor_, whose combat with the
      _Retiarius_ formed one of the most lively scenes in the bloody
      sports of the amphitheatre. The _Secutor_ was armed with a
      helmet, sword, and buckler; his naked antagonist had only a large
      net and a trident; with the one he endeavored to entangle, with
      the other to despatch his enemy. If he missed the first throw, he
      was obliged to fly from the pursuit of the _Secutor_, till he had
      prepared his net for a second cast. 37 The emperor fought in this
      character seven hundred and thirty-five several times. These
      glorious achievements were carefully recorded in the public acts
      of the empire; and that he might omit no circumstance of infamy,
      he received from the common fund of gladiators a stipend so
      exorbitant that it became a new and most ignominious tax upon the
      Roman people. 38 It may be easily supposed, that in these
      engagements the master of the world was always successful; in the
      amphitheatre, his victories were not often sanguinary; but when
      he exercised his skill in the school of gladiators, or his own
      palace, his wretched antagonists were frequently honored with a
      mortal wound from the hand of Commodus, and obliged to seal their
      flattery with their blood. 39 He now disdained the appellation of
      Hercules. The name of Paulus, a celebrated Secutor, was the only
      one which delighted his ear. It was inscribed on his colossal
      statues, and repeated in the redoubled acclamations 40 of the
      mournful and applauding senate. 41 Claudius Pompeianus, the
      virtuous husband of Lucilla, was the only senator who asserted
      the honor of his rank. As a father, he permitted his sons to
      consult their safety by attending the amphitheatre. As a Roman,
      he declared, that his own life was in the emperor’s hands, but
      that he would never behold the son of Marcus prostituting his
      person and dignity. Notwithstanding his manly resolution
      Pompeianus escaped the resentment of the tyrant, and, with his
      honor, had the good fortune to preserve his life. 42

      36 (return) [ The virtuous and even the wise princes forbade the
      senators and knights to embrace this scandalous profession, under
      pain of infamy, or, what was more dreaded by those profligate
      wretches, of exile. The tyrants allured them to dishonor by
      threats and rewards. Nero once produced in the arena forty
      senators and sixty knights. See Lipsius, Saturnalia, l. ii. c. 2.
      He has happily corrected a passage of Suetonius in Nerone, c.
      12.]

      37 (return) [ Lipsius, l. ii. c. 7, 8. Juvenal, in the eighth
      satire, gives a picturesque description of this combat.]

      38 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 50. Dion, l. lxxii. p. 1220. He
      received, for each time, decies, about 8000l. sterling.]

      39 (return) [ Victor tells us, that Commodus only allowed his
      antagonists a...weapon, dreading most probably the consequences
      of their despair.]

      40 (return) [Footnote 40: They were obliged to repeat, six
      hundred and twenty-six times, Paolus first of the Secutors, &c.]

      41 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxii. p. 1221. He speaks of his own
      baseness and danger.]

      42 (return) [ He mixed, however, some prudence with his courage,
      and passed the greatest part of his time in a country retirement;
      alleging his advanced age, and the weakness of his eyes. “I never
      saw him in the senate,” says Dion, “except during the short reign
      of Pertinax.” All his infirmities had suddenly left him, and they
      returned as suddenly upon the murder of that excellent prince.
      Dion, l. lxxiii. p. 1227.]

      Commodus had now attained the summit of vice and infamy. Amidst
      the acclamations of a flattering court, he was unable to disguise
      from himself, that he had deserved the contempt and hatred of
      every man of sense and virtue in his empire. His ferocious spirit
      was irritated by the consciousness of that hatred, by the envy of
      every kind of merit, by the just apprehension of danger, and by
      the habit of slaughter, which he contracted in his daily
      amusements. History has preserved a long list of consular
      senators sacrificed to his wanton suspicion, which sought out,
      with peculiar anxiety, those unfortunate persons connected,
      however remotely, with the family of the Antonines, without
      sparing even the ministers of his crimes or pleasures. 43 His
      cruelty proved at last fatal to himself. He had shed with
      impunity the noblest blood of Rome: he perished as soon as he was
      dreaded by his own domestics. Marcia, his favorite concubine,
      Eclectus, his chamberlain, and Lætus, his Prætorian præfect,
      alarmed by the fate of their companions and predecessors,
      resolved to prevent the destruction which every hour hung over
      their heads, either from the mad caprice of the tyrant, 431 or
      the sudden indignation of the people. Marcia seized the occasion
      of presenting a draught of wine to her lover, after he had
      fatigued himself with hunting some wild beasts. Commodus retired
      to sleep; but whilst he was laboring with the effects of poison
      and drunkenness, a robust youth, by profession a wrestler,
      entered his chamber, and strangled him without resistance. The
      body was secretly conveyed out of the palace, before the least
      suspicion was entertained in the city, or even in the court, of
      the emperor’s death. Such was the fate of the son of Marcus, and
      so easy was it to destroy a hated tyrant, who, by the artificial
      powers of government, had oppressed, during thirteen years, so
      many millions of subjects, each of whom was equal to their master
      in personal strength and personal abilities. 44

      43 (return) [ The prefects were changed almost hourly or daily;
      and the caprice of Commodus was often fatal to his most favored
      chamberlains. Hist. August. p. 46, 51.]

      431 (return) [ Commodus had already resolved to massacre them the
      following night they determined o anticipate his design. Herod.
      i. 17.—W.]

      44 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxii. p. 1222. Herodian, l. i. p. 43.
      Hist. August. p. 52.]

      The measures of the conspirators were conducted with the
      deliberate coolness and celerity which the greatness of the
      occasion required. They resolved instantly to fill the vacant
      throne with an emperor whose character would justify and maintain
      the action that had been committed. They fixed on Pertinax,
      præfect of the city, an ancient senator of consular rank, whose
      conspicuous merit had broke through the obscurity of his birth,
      and raised him to the first honors of the state. He had
      successively governed most of the provinces of the empire; and in
      all his great employments, military as well as civil, he had
      uniformly distinguished himself by the firmness, the prudence,
      and the integrity of his conduct. 45 He now remained almost alone
      of the friends and ministers of Marcus; and when, at a late hour
      of the night, he was awakened with the news, that the chamberlain
      and the præfect were at his door, he received them with intrepid
      resignation, and desired they would execute their master’s
      orders. Instead of death, they offered him the throne of the
      Roman world. During some moments he distrusted their intentions
      and assurances. Convinced at length of the death of Commodus, he
      accepted the purple with a sincere reluctance, the natural effect
      of his knowledge both of the duties and of the dangers of the
      supreme rank. 46

      45 (return) [ Pertinax was a native of Alba Pompeia, in Piedmont,
      and son of a timber merchant. The order of his employments (it is
      marked by Capitolinus) well deserves to be set down, as
      expressive of the form of government and manners of the age. 1.
      He was a centurion. 2. Præfect of a cohort in Syria, in the
      Parthian war, and in Britain. 3. He obtained an Ala, or squadron
      of horse, in Mæsia. 4. He was commissary of provisions on the
      Æmilian way. 5. He commanded the fleet upon the Rhine. 6. He was
      procurator of Dacia, with a salary of about 1600l. a year. 7. He
      commanded the veterans of a legion. 8. He obtained the rank of
      senator. 9. Of prætor. 10. With the command of the first legion
      in Rhætia and Noricum. 11. He was consul about the year 175. 12.
      He attended Marcus into the East. 13. He commanded an army on the
      Danube. 14. He was consular legate of Mæsia. 15. Of Dacia. 16. Of
      Syria. 17. Of Britain. 18. He had the care of the public
      provisions at Rome. 19. He was proconsul of Africa. 20. Præfect
      of the city. Herodian (l. i. p. 48) does justice to his
      disinterested spirit; but Capitolinus, who collected every
      popular rumor, charges him with a great fortune acquired by
      bribery and corruption.]

      46 (return) [ Julian, in the Cæsars, taxes him with being
      accessory to the death of Commodus.]

      Lætus conducted without delay his new emperor to the camp of the
      Prætorians, diffusing at the same time through the city a
      seasonable report that Commodus died suddenly of an apoplexy; and
      that the virtuous Pertinax had _already_ succeeded to the throne.
      The guards were rather surprised than pleased with the suspicious
      death of a prince, whose indulgence and liberality they alone had
      experienced; but the emergency of the occasion, the authority of
      their præfect, the reputation of Pertinax, and the clamors of the
      people, obliged them to stifle their secret discontents, to
      accept the donative promised by the new emperor, to swear
      allegiance to him, and with joyful acclamations and laurels in
      their hands to conduct him to the senate house, that the military
      consent might be ratified by the civil authority. This important
      night was now far spent; with the dawn of day, and the
      commencement of the new year, the senators expected a summons to
      attend an ignominious ceremony. 461 In spite of all
      remonstrances, even of those of his creatures who yet preserved
      any regard for prudence or decency, Commodus had resolved to pass
      the night in the gladiators’ school, and from thence to take
      possession of the consulship, in the habit and with the
      attendance of that infamous crew. On a sudden, before the break
      of day, the senate was called together in the temple of Concord,
      to meet the guards, and to ratify the election of a new emperor.
      For a few minutes they sat in silent suspense, doubtful of their
      unexpected deliverance, and suspicious of the cruel artifices of
      Commodus: but when at length they were assured that the tyrant
      was no more, they resigned themselves to all the transports of
      joy and indignation. Pertinax, who modestly represented the
      meanness of his extraction, and pointed out several noble
      senators more deserving than himself of the empire, was
      constrained by their dutiful violence to ascend the throne, and
      received all the titles of Imperial power, confirmed by the most
      sincere vows of fidelity. The memory of Commodus was branded with
      eternal infamy. The names of tyrant, of gladiator, of public
      enemy resounded in every corner of the house. They decreed in
      tumultuous votes, 462 that his honors should be reversed, his
      titles erased from the public monuments, his statues thrown down,
      his body dragged with a hook into the stripping room of the
      gladiators, to satiate the public fury; and they expressed some
      indignation against those officious servants who had already
      presumed to screen his remains from the justice of the senate.
      But Pertinax could not refuse those last rites to the memory of
      Marcus, and the tears of his first protector Claudius Pompeianus,
      who lamented the cruel fate of his brother-in-law, and lamented
      still more that he had deserved it. 47

      461 (return) [ The senate always assembled at the beginning of
      the year, on the night of the 1st January, (see Savaron on Sid.
      Apoll. viii. 6,) and this happened the present year, as usual,
      without any particular order.—G from W.]

      462 (return) [ What Gibbon improperly calls, both here and in the
      note, tumultuous decrees, were no more than the applauses and
      acclamations which recur so often in the history of the emperors.
      The custom passed from the theatre to the forum, from the forum
      to the senate. Applauses on the adoption of the Imperial decrees
      were first introduced under Trajan. (Plin. jun. Panegyr. 75.) One
      senator read the form of the decree, and all the rest answered by
      acclamations, accompanied with a kind of chant or rhythm. These
      were some of the acclamations addressed to Pertinax, and against
      the memory of Commodus. Hosti patriæ honores detrahantur.
      Parricidæ honores detrahantur. Ut salvi simus, Jupiter, optime,
      maxime, serva nobis Pertinacem. This custom prevailed not only in
      the councils of state, but in all the meetings of the senate.
      However inconsistent it may appear with the solemnity of a
      religious assembly, the early Christians adopted and introduced
      it into their synods, notwithstanding the opposition of some of
      the Fathers, particularly of St. Chrysostom. See the Coll. of
      Franc. Bern. Ferrarius de veterum acclamatione in Grævii Thesaur.
      Antiq. Rom. i. 6.—W. This note is rather hypercritical, as
      regards Gibbon, but appears to be worthy of preservation.—M.]

      47 (return) [ Capitolinus gives us the particulars of these
      tumultuary votes, which were moved by one senator, and repeated,
      or rather chanted by the whole body. Hist. August. p. 52.]

      These effusions of impotent rage against a dead emperor, whom the
      senate had flattered when alive with the most abject servility,
      betrayed a just but ungenerous spirit of revenge.

      The legality of these decrees was, however, supported by the
      principles of the Imperial constitution. To censure, to depose,
      or to punish with death, the first magistrate of the republic,
      who had abused his delegated trust, was the ancient and undoubted
      prerogative of the Roman senate; 48 but the feeble assembly was
      obliged to content itself with inflicting on a fallen tyrant that
      public justice, from which, during his life and reign, he had
      been shielded by the strong arm of military despotism. 481

      48 (return) [ The senate condemned Nero to be put to death more
      majorum. Sueton. c. 49.]

      481 (return) [ No particular law assigned this right to the
      senate: it was deduced from the ancient principles of the
      republic. Gibbon appears to infer, from the passage of Suetonius,
      that the senate, according to its ancient right, punished Nero
      with death. The words, however, more majerum refer not to the
      decree of the senate, but to the kind of death, which was taken
      from an old law of Romulus. (See Victor. Epit. Ed. Artzen p. 484,
      n. 7.)—W.]

      Pertinax found a nobler way of condemning his predecessor’s
      memory; by the contrast of his own virtues with the vices of
      Commodus. On the day of his accession, he resigned over to his
      wife and son his whole private fortune; that they might have no
      pretence to solicit favors at the expense of the state. He
      refused to flatter the vanity of the former with the title of
      Augusta; or to corrupt the inexperienced youth of the latter by
      the rank of Cæsar. Accurately distinguishing between the duties
      of a parent and those of a sovereign, he educated his son with a
      severe simplicity, which, while it gave him no assured prospect
      of the throne, might in time have rendered him worthy of it. In
      public, the behavior of Pertinax was grave and affable. He lived
      with the virtuous part of the senate, (and, in a private station,
      he had been acquainted with the true character of each
      individual,) without either pride or jealousy; considered them as
      friends and companions, with whom he had shared the danger of the
      tyranny, and with whom he wished to enjoy the security of the
      present time. He very frequently invited them to familiar
      entertainments, the frugality of which was ridiculed by those who
      remembered and regretted the luxurious prodigality of Commodus.
      49

      49 (return) [ Dion (l. lxxiii. p. 1223) speaks of these
      entertainments, as a senator who had supped with the emperor;
      Capitolinus, (Hist. August. p. 58,) like a slave, who had
      received his intelligence from one the scullions.]

      To heal, as far as it was possible, the wounds inflicted by the
      hand of tyranny, was the pleasing, but melancholy, task of
      Pertinax. The innocent victims, who yet survived, were recalled
      from exile, released from prison, and restored to the full
      possession of their honors and fortunes. The unburied bodies of
      murdered senators (for the cruelty of Commodus endeavored to
      extend itself beyond death) were deposited in the sepulchres of
      their ancestors; their memory was justified and every consolation
      was bestowed on their ruined and afflicted families. Among these
      consolations, one of the most grateful was the punishment of the
      Delators; the common enemies of their master, of virtue, and of
      their country. Yet even in the inquisition of these legal
      assassins, Pertinax proceeded with a steady temper, which gave
      every thing to justice, and nothing to popular prejudice and
      resentment.

      The finances of the state demanded the most vigilant care of the
      emperor. Though every measure of injustice and extortion had been
      adopted, which could collect the property of the subject into the
      coffers of the prince, the rapaciousness of Commodus had been so
      very inadequate to his extravagance, that, upon his death, no
      more than eight thousand pounds were found in the exhausted
      treasury, 50 to defray the current expenses of government, and to
      discharge the pressing demand of a liberal donative, which the
      new emperor had been obliged to promise to the Prætorian guards.
      Yet under these distressed circumstances, Pertinax had the
      generous firmness to remit all the oppressive taxes invented by
      Commodus, and to cancel all the unjust claims of the treasury;
      declaring, in a decree of the senate, “that he was better
      satisfied to administer a poor republic with innocence, than to
      acquire riches by the ways of tyranny and dishonor.” Economy and
      industry he considered as the pure and genuine sources of wealth;
      and from them he soon derived a copious supply for the public
      necessities. The expense of the household was immediately reduced
      to one half. All the instruments of luxury Pertinax exposed to
      public auction, 51 gold and silver plate, chariots of a singular
      construction, a superfluous wardrobe of silk and embroidery, and
      a great number of beautiful slaves of both sexes; excepting only,
      with attentive humanity, those who were born in a state of
      freedom, and had been ravished from the arms of their weeping
      parents. At the same time that he obliged the worthless favorites
      of the tyrant to resign a part of their ill-gotten wealth, he
      satisfied the just creditors of the state, and unexpectedly
      discharged the long arrears of honest services. He removed the
      oppressive restrictions which had been laid upon commerce, and
      granted all the uncultivated lands in Italy and the provinces to
      those who would improve them; with an exemption from tribute
      during the term of ten years. 52

      50 (return) [ Decies. The blameless economy of Pius left his
      successors a treasure of vicies septies millies, above two and
      twenty millions sterling. Dion, l. lxxiii. p. 1231.]

      51 (return) [ Besides the design of converting these useless
      ornaments into money, Dion (l. lxxiii. p. 1229) assigns two
      secret motives of Pertinax. He wished to expose the vices of
      Commodus, and to discover by the purchasers those who most
      resembled him.]

      52 (return) [ Though Capitolinus has picked up many idle tales of
      the private life of Pertinax, he joins with Dion and Herodian in
      admiring his public conduct.]

      Such a uniform conduct had already secured to Pertinax the
      noblest reward of a sovereign, the love and esteem of his people.

      Those who remembered the virtues of Marcus were happy to
      contemplate in their new emperor the features of that bright
      original; and flattered themselves, that they should long enjoy
      the benign influence of his administration. A hasty zeal to
      reform the corrupted state, accompanied with less prudence than
      might have been expected from the years and experience of
      Pertinax, proved fatal to himself and to his country. His honest
      indiscretion united against him the servile crowd, who found
      their private benefit in the public disorders, and who preferred
      the favor of a tyrant to the inexorable equality of the laws. 53

      53 (return) [ Leges, rem surdam, inexorabilem esse. T. Liv. ii.
      3.]

      Amidst the general joy, the sullen and angry countenance of the
      Prætorian guards betrayed their inward dissatisfaction. They had
      reluctantly submitted to Pertinax; they dreaded the strictness of
      the ancient discipline, which he was preparing to restore; and
      they regretted the license of the former reign. Their discontents
      were secretly fomented by Lætus, their præfect, who found, when
      it was too late, that his new emperor would reward a servant, but
      would not be ruled by a favorite. On the third day of his reign,
      the soldiers seized on a noble senator, with a design to carry
      him to the camp, and to invest him with the Imperial purple.
      Instead of being dazzled by the dangerous honor, the affrighted
      victim escaped from their violence, and took refuge at the feet
      of Pertinax. A short time afterwards, Sosius Falco, one of the
      consuls of the year, a rash youth, 54 but of an ancient and
      opulent family, listened to the voice of ambition; and a
      conspiracy was formed during a short absence of Pertinax, which
      was crushed by his sudden return to Rome, and his resolute
      behavior. Falco was on the point of being justly condemned to
      death as a public enemy had he not been saved by the earnest and
      sincere entreaties of the injured emperor, who conjured the
      senate, that the purity of his reign might not be stained by the
      blood even of a guilty senator.

      54 (return) [ If we credit Capitolinus, (which is rather
      difficult,) Falco behaved with the most petulant indecency to
      Pertinax, on the day of his accession. The wise emperor only
      admonished him of his youth and in experience. Hist. August. p.
      55.]

      These disappointments served only to irritate the rage of the
      Prætorian guards. On the twenty-eighth of March, eighty-six days
      only after the death of Commodus, a general sedition broke out in
      the camp, which the officers wanted either power or inclination
      to suppress. Two or three hundred of the most desperate soldiers
      marched at noonday, with arms in their hands and fury in their
      looks, towards the Imperial palace. The gates were thrown open by
      their companions upon guard, and by the domestics of the old
      court, who had already formed a secret conspiracy against the
      life of the too virtuous emperor. On the news of their approach,
      Pertinax, disdaining either flight or concealment, advanced to
      meet his assassins; and recalled to their minds his own
      innocence, and the sanctity of their recent oath. For a few
      moments they stood in silent suspense, ashamed of their atrocious
      design, and awed by the venerable aspect and majestic firmness of
      their sovereign, till at length, the despair of pardon reviving
      their fury, a barbarian of the country of Tongress 55 levelled
      the first blow against Pertinax, who was instantly despatched
      with a multitude of wounds. His head, separated from his body,
      and placed on a lance, was carried in triumph to the Prætorian
      camp, in the sight of a mournful and indignant people, who
      lamented the unworthy fate of that excellent prince, and the
      transient blessings of a reign, the memory of which could serve
      only to aggravate their approaching misfortunes. 56

      55 (return) [ The modern bishopric of Liege. This soldier
      probably belonged to the Batavian horse-guards, who were mostly
      raised in the duchy of Gueldres and the neighborhood, and were
      distinguished by their valor, and by the boldness with which they
      swam their horses across the broadest and most rapid rivers.
      Tacit. Hist. iv. 12 Dion, l. lv p. 797 Lipsius de magnitudine
      Romana, l. i. c. 4.]

      56 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxiii. p. 1232. Herodian, l. ii. p. 60.
      Hist. August. p. 58. Victor in Epitom. et in Cæsarib. Eutropius,
      viii. 16.]




      