Chapter X: Emperors Decius, Gallus, Æmilianus, Valerian And
      Gallienus—Part I.

     The Emperors Decius, Gallus, Æmilianus, Valerian, And
     Gallienus.—The General Irruption Of The Barbari Ans.—The Thirty
     Tyrants.

      From the great secular games celebrated by Philip, to the death
      of the emperor Gallienus, there elapsed twenty years of shame and
      misfortune. During that calamitous period, every instant of time
      was marked, every province of the Roman world was afflicted, by
      barbarous invaders, and military tyrants, and the ruined empire
      seemed to approach the last and fatal moment of its dissolution.
      The confusion of the times, and the scarcity of authentic
      memorials, oppose equal difficulties to the historian, who
      attempts to preserve a clear and unbroken thread of narration.
      Surrounded with imperfect fragments, always concise, often
      obscure, and sometimes contradictory, he is reduced to collect,
      to compare, and to conjecture: and though he ought never to place
      his conjectures in the rank of facts, yet the knowledge of human
      nature, and of the sure operation of its fierce and unrestrained
      passions, might, on some occasions, supply the want of historical
      materials.

      There is not, for instance, any difficulty in conceiving, that
      the successive murders of so many emperors had loosened all the
      ties of allegiance between the prince and people; that all the
      generals of Philip were disposed to imitate the example of their
      master; and that the caprice of armies, long since habituated to
      frequent and violent revolutions, might every day raise to the
      throne the most obscure of their fellow-soldiers. History can
      only add, that the rebellion against the emperor Philip broke out
      in the summer of the year two hundred and forty-nine, among the
      legions of Mæsia; and that a subaltern officer, 1 named Marinus,
      was the object of their seditious choice. Philip was alarmed. He
      dreaded lest the treason of the Mæsian army should prove the
      first spark of a general conflagration. Distracted with the
      consciousness of his guilt and of his danger, he communicated the
      intelligence to the senate. A gloomy silence prevailed, the
      effect of fear, and perhaps of disaffection; till at length
      Decius, one of the assembly, assuming a spirit worthy of his
      noble extraction, ventured to discover more intrepidity than the
      emperor seemed to possess. He treated the whole business with
      contempt, as a hasty and inconsiderate tumult, and Philip’s rival
      as a phantom of royalty, who in a very few days would be
      destroyed by the same inconstancy that had created him. The
      speedy completion of the prophecy inspired Philip with a just
      esteem for so able a counsellor; and Decius appeared to him the
      only person capable of restoring peace and discipline to an army
      whose tumultuous spirit did not immediately subside after the
      murder of Marinus. Decius, 2 who long resisted his own
      nomination, seems to have insinuated the danger of presenting a
      leader of merit to the angry and apprehensive minds of the
      soldiers; and his prediction was again confirmed by the event.
      The legions of Mæsia forced their judge to become their
      accomplice. They left him only the alternative of death or the
      purple. His subsequent conduct, after that decisive measure, was
      unavoidable. He conducted, or followed, his army to the confines
      of Italy, whither Philip, collecting all his force to repel the
      formidable competitor whom he had raised up, advanced to meet
      him. The Imperial troops were superior in number; but the rebels
      formed an army of veterans, commanded by an able and experienced
      leader. Philip was either killed in the battle, or put to death a
      few days afterwards at Verona. His son and associate in the
      empire was massacred at Rome by the Prætorian guards; and the
      victorious Decius, with more favorable circumstances than the
      ambition of that age can usually plead, was universally
      acknowledged by the senate and provinces. It is reported, that,
      immediately after his reluctant acceptance of the title of
      Augustus, he had assured Philip, by a private message, of his
      innocence and loyalty, solemnly protesting, that, on his arrival
      on Italy, he would resign the Imperial ornaments, and return to
      the condition of an obedient subject. His professions might be
      sincere; but in the situation where fortune had placed him, it
      was scarcely possible that he could either forgive or be
      forgiven. 3

      1 (return) [ The expression used by Zosimus and Zonaras may
      signify that Marinus commanded a century, a cohort, or a legion.]

      2 (return) [ His birth at Bubalia, a little village in Pannonia,
      (Eutrop. ix. Victor. in Cæsarib. et Epitom.,) seems to
      contradict, unless it was merely accidental, his supposed descent
      from the Decii. Six hundred years had bestowed nobility on the
      Decii: but at the commencement of that period, they were only
      plebeians of merit, and among the first who shared the consulship
      with the haughty patricians. Plebeine Deciorum animæ, &c.
      Juvenal, Sat. viii. 254. See the spirited speech of Decius, in
      Livy. x. 9, 10.]

      3 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 20, c. 22. Zonaras, l. xii. p.
      624, edit. Louvre.]

      The emperor Decius had employed a few months in the works of
      peace and the administration of justice, when he was summoned to
      the banks of the Danube by the invasion of the Goths. This is the
      first considerable occasion in which history mentions that great
      people, who afterwards broke the Roman power, sacked the Capitol,
      and reigned in Gaul, Spain, and Italy. So memorable was the part
      which they acted in the subversion of the Western empire, that
      the name of Goths is frequently but improperly used as a general
      appellation of rude and warlike barbarism.

      In the beginning of the sixth century, and after the conquest of
      Italy, the Goths, in possession of present greatness, very
      naturally indulged themselves in the prospect of past and of
      future glory. They wished to preserve the memory of their
      ancestors, and to transmit to posterity their own achievements.
      The principal minister of the court of Ravenna, the learned
      Cassiodorus, gratified the inclination of the conquerors in a
      Gothic history, which consisted of twelve books, now reduced to
      the imperfect abridgment of Jornandes. 4 These writers passed
      with the most artful conciseness over the misfortunes of the
      nation, celebrated its successful valor, and adorned the triumph
      with many Asiatic trophies, that more properly belonged to the
      people of Scythia. On the faith of ancient songs, the uncertain,
      but the only memorials of barbarians, they deduced the first
      origin of the Goths from the vast island, or peninsula, of
      Scandinavia. 5 501 That extreme country of the North was not
      unknown to the conquerors of Italy: the ties of ancient
      consanguinity had been strengthened by recent offices of
      friendship; and a Scandinavian king had cheerfully abdicated his
      savage greatness, that he might pass the remainder of his days in
      the peaceful and polished court of Ravenna. 6 Many vestiges,
      which cannot be ascribed to the arts of popular vanity, attest
      the ancient residence of the Goths in the countries beyond the
      Rhine. From the time of the geographer Ptolemy, the southern part
      of Sweden seems to have continued in the possession of the less
      enterprising remnant of the nation, and a large territory is even
      at present divided into east and west Gothland. During the middle
      ages, (from the ninth to the twelfth century,) whilst
      Christianity was advancing with a slow progress into the North,
      the Goths and the Swedes composed two distinct and sometimes
      hostile members of the same monarchy. 7 The latter of these two
      names has prevailed without extinguishing the former. The Swedes,
      who might well be satisfied with their own fame in arms, have, in
      every age, claimed the kindred glory of the Goths. In a moment of
      discontent against the court of Rome, Charles the Twelfth
      insinuated, that his victorious troops were not degenerated from
      their brave ancestors, who had already subdued the mistress of
      the world. 8

      4 (return) [ See the prefaces of Cassiodorus and Jornandes; it is
      surprising that the latter should be omitted in the excellent
      edition, published by Grotius, of the Gothic writers.]

      5 (return) [ On the authority of Ablavius, Jornandes quotes some
      old Gothic chronicles in verse. De Reb. Geticis, c. 4.]

      501 (return) [ The Goths have inhabited Scandinavia, but it was
      not their original habitation. This great nation was anciently of
      the Suevian race; it occupied, in the time of Tacitus, and long
      before, Mecklenburgh, Pomerania Southern Prussia and the
      north-west of Poland. A little before the birth of J. C., and in
      the first years of that century, they belonged to the kingdom of
      Marbod, king of the Marcomanni: but Cotwalda, a young Gothic
      prince, delivered them from that tyranny, and established his own
      power over the kingdom of the Marcomanni, already much weakened
      by the victories of Tiberius. The power of the Goths at that time
      must have been great: it was probably from them that the Sinus
      Codanus (the Baltic) took this name, as it was afterwards called
      Mare Suevicum, and Mare Venedicum, during the superiority of the
      proper Suevi and the Venedi. The epoch in which the Goths passed
      into Scandinavia is unknown. See Adelung, Hist. of Anc. Germany,
      p. 200. Gatterer, Hist. Univ. 458.—G. ——M. St. Martin observes,
      that the Scandinavian descent of the Goths rests on the authority
      of Jornandes, who professed to derive it from the traditions of
      the Goths. He is supported by Procopius and Paulus Diaconus. Yet
      the Goths are unquestionably the same with the Getæ of the
      earlier historians. St. Martin, note on Le Beau, Hist. du bas
      Empire, iii. 324. The identity of the Getæ and Goths is by no
      means generally admitted. On the whole, they seem to be one vast
      branch of the Indo-Teutonic race, who spread irregularly towards
      the north of Europe, and at different periods, and in different
      regions, came in contact with the more civilized nations of the
      south. At this period, there seems to have been a reflux of these
      Gothic tribes from the North. Malte Brun considers that there are
      strong grounds for receiving the Islandic traditions commented by
      the Danish Varro, M. Suhm. From these, and the voyage of Pytheas,
      which Malte Brun considers genuine, the Goths were in possession
      of Scandinavia, Ey-Gothland, 250 years before J. C., and of a
      tract on the continent (Reid-Gothland) between the mouths of the
      Vistula and the Oder. In their southern migration, they followed
      the course of the Vistula; afterwards, of the Dnieper. Malte
      Brun, Geogr. i. p. 387, edit. 1832. Geijer, the historian of
      Sweden, ably maintains the Scandinavian origin of the Goths. The
      Gothic language, according to Bopp, is the link between the
      Sanscrit and the modern Teutonic dialects: “I think that I am
      reading Sanscrit when I am reading Olphilas.” Bopp, Conjugations
      System der Sanscrit Sprache, preface, p. x—M.]

      6 (return) [ Jornandes, c. 3.]

      7 (return) [ See in the Prolegomena of Grotius some large
      extracts from Adam of Bremen, and Saxo-Grammaticus. The former
      wrote in the year 1077, the latter flourished about the year
      1200.]

      8 (return) [ Voltaire, Histoire de Charles XII. l. iii. When the
      Austrians desired the aid of the court of Rome against Gustavus
      Adolphus, they always represented that conqueror as the lineal
      successor of Alaric. Harte’s History of Gustavus, vol. ii. p.
      123.]

      Till the end of the eleventh century, a celebrated temple
      subsisted at Upsal, the most considerable town of the Swedes and
      Goths. It was enriched with the gold which the Scandinavians had
      acquired in their piratical adventures, and sanctified by the
      uncouth representations of the three principal deities, the god
      of war, the goddess of generation, and the god of thunder. In the
      general festival, that was solemnized every ninth year, nine
      animals of every species (without excepting the human) were
      sacrificed, and their bleeding bodies suspended in the sacred
      grove adjacent to the temple. 9 The only traces that now subsist
      of this barbaric superstition are contained in the Edda, 901 a
      system of mythology, compiled in Iceland about the thirteenth
      century, and studied by the learned of Denmark and Sweden, as the
      most valuable remains of their ancient traditions.

      9 (return) [ See Adam of Bremen in Grotii Prolegomenis, p. 105.
      The temple of Upsal was destroyed by Ingo, king of Sweden, who
      began his reign in the year 1075, and about fourscore years
      afterwards, a Christian cathedral was erected on its ruins. See
      Dalin’s History of Sweden, in the Bibliotheque Raisonee.]

      901 (return) [ The Eddas have at length been made accessible to
      European scholars by the completion of the publication of the
      Sæmundine Edda by the Arna Magnæan Commission, in 3 vols. 4to.,
      with a copious lexicon of northern mythology.—M.]

      Notwithstanding the mysterious obscurity of the Edda, we can
      easily distinguish two persons confounded under the name of Odin;
      the god of war, and the great legislator of Scandinavia. The
      latter, the Mahomet of the North, instituted a religion adapted
      to the climate and to the people. Numerous tribes on either side
      of the Baltic were subdued by the invincible valor of Odin, by
      his persuasive eloquence, and by the fame which he acquired of a
      most skilful magician. The faith that he had propagated, during a
      long and prosperous life, he confirmed by a voluntary death.
      Apprehensive of the ignominious approach of disease and
      infirmity, he resolved to expire as became a warrior. In a solemn
      assembly of the Swedes and Goths, he wounded himself in nine
      mortal places, hastening away (as he asserted with his dying
      voice) to prepare the feast of heroes in the palace of the God of
      war. 10

      10 (return) [ Mallet, Introduction a l’Histoire du Dannemarc.]

      The native and proper habitation of Odin is distinguished by the
      appellation of As-gard. The happy resemblance of that name with
      As-burg, or As-of, 11 words of a similar signification, has given
      rise to an historical system of so pleasing a contexture, that we
      could almost wish to persuade ourselves of its truth. It is
      supposed that Odin was the chief of a tribe of barbarians which
      dwelt on the banks of the Lake Mæotis, till the fall of
      Mithridates and the arms of Pompey menaced the North with
      servitude. That Odin, yielding with indignant fury to a power he
      was unable to resist, conducted his tribe from the frontiers of
      the Asiatic Sarmatia into Sweden, with the great design of
      forming, in that inaccessible retreat of freedom, a religion and
      a people which, in some remote age, might be subservient to his
      immortal revenge; when his invincible Goths, armed with martial
      fanaticism, should issue in numerous swarms from the neighborhood
      of the Polar circle, to chastise the oppressors of mankind. 12

      11 (return) [ Mallet, c. iv. p. 55, has collected from Strabo,
      Pliny, Ptolemy, and Stephanus Byzantinus, the vestiges of such a
      city and people.]

      12 (return) [ This wonderful expedition of Odin, which, by
      deducting the enmity of the Goths and Romans from so memorable a
      cause, might supply the noble groundwork of an epic poem, cannot
      safely be received as authentic history. According to the obvious
      sense of the Edda, and the interpretation of the most skilful
      critics, As-gard, instead of denoting a real city of the Asiatic
      Sarmatia, is the fictitious appellation of the mystic abode of
      the gods, the Olympus of Scandinavia; from whence the prophet was
      supposed to descend, when he announced his new religion to the
      Gothic nations, who were already seated in the southern parts of
      Sweden. * Note: A curious letter may be consulted on this subject
      from the Swede, Ihre counsellor in the Chancery of Upsal, printed
      at Upsal by Edman, in 1772 and translated into German by M.
      Schlozer. Gottingen, printed for Dietericht, 1779.—G. ——Gibbon,
      at a later period of his work, recanted his opinion of the truth
      of this expedition of Odin. The Asiatic origin of the Goths is
      almost certain from the affinity of their language to the
      Sanscrit and Persian; but their northern writers, when all
      mythology was reduced to hero worship.—M.]

      If so many successive generations of Goths were capable of
      preserving a faint tradition of their Scandinavian origin, we
      must not expect, from such unlettered barbarians, any distinct
      account of the time and circumstances of their emigration. To
      cross the Baltic was an easy and natural attempt. The inhabitants
      of Sweden were masters of a sufficient number of large vessels,
      with oars, 13 and the distance is little more than one hundred
      miles from Carlscroon to the nearest ports of Pomerania and
      Prussia. Here, at length, we land on firm and historic ground. At
      least as early as the Christian æra, 14 and as late as the age of
      the Antonines, 15 the Goths were established towards the mouth of
      the Vistula, and in that fertile province where the commercial
      cities of Thorn, Elbing, Köningsberg, and Dantzick, were long
      afterwards founded. 16 Westward of the Goths, the numerous tribes
      of the Vandals were spread along the banks of the Oder, and the
      sea-coast of Pomerania and Mecklenburgh. A striking resemblance
      of manners, complexion, religion, and language, seemed to
      indicate that the Vandals and the Goths were originally one great
      people. 17 The latter appear to have been subdivided into
      Ostrogoths, Visigoths, and Gepidæ. 18 The distinction among the
      Vandals was more strongly marked by the independent names of
      Heruli, Burgundians, Lombards, and a variety of other petty
      states, many of which, in a future age, expanded themselves into
      powerful monarchies. 181

      13 (return) [ Tacit. Germania, c. 44.]

      14 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. ii. 62. If we could yield a firm
      assent to the navigations of Pytheas of Marseilles, we must allow
      that the Goths had passed the Baltic at least three hundred years
      before Christ.]

      15 (return) [ Ptolemy, l. ii.]

      16 (return) [ By the German colonies who followed the arms of the
      Teutonic knights. The conquest and conversion of Prussia were
      completed by those adventurers in the thirteenth century.]

      17 (return) [ Pliny (Hist. Natur. iv. 14) and Procopius (in Bell.
      Vandal. l. i. c. l) agree in this opinion. They lived in distant
      ages, and possessed different means of investigating the truth.]

      18 (return) [ The Ostro and Visi, the eastern and western Goths,
      obtained those denominations from their original seats in
      Scandinavia. In all their future marches and settlements they
      preserved, with their names, the same relative situation. When
      they first departed from Sweden, the infant colony was contained
      in three vessels. The third, being a heavy sailer, lagged behind,
      and the crew, which afterwards swelled into a nation, received
      from that circumstance the appellation of Gepidæ or Loiterers.
      Jornandes, c. 17. * Note: It was not in Scandinavia that the
      Goths were divided into Ostrogoths and Visigoths; that division
      took place after their irruption into Dacia in the third century:
      those who came from Mecklenburgh and Pomerania were called
      Visigoths; those who came from the south of Prussia, and the
      northwest of Poland, called themselves Ostrogoths. Adelung, Hist.
      All. p. 202 Gatterer, Hist. Univ. 431.—G.]

      181 (return) [ This opinion is by no means probable. The Vandals
      and the Goths equally belonged to the great division of the
      Suevi, but the two tribes were very different. Those who have
      treated on this part of history, appear to me to have neglected
      to remark that the ancients almost always gave the name of the
      dominant and conquering people to all the weaker and conquered
      races. So Pliny calls Vindeli, Vandals, all the people of the
      north-east of Europe, because at that epoch the Vandals were
      doubtless the conquering tribe. Cæsar, on the contrary, ranges
      under the name of Suevi, many of the tribes whom Pliny reckons as
      Vandals, because the Suevi, properly so called, were then the
      most powerful tribe in Germany. When the Goths, become in their
      turn conquerors, had subjugated the nations whom they encountered
      on their way, these nations lost their name with their liberty,
      and became of Gothic origin. The Vandals themselves were then
      considered as Goths; the Heruli, the Gepidæ, &c., suffered the
      same fate. A common origin was thus attributed to tribes who had
      only been united by the conquests of some dominant nation, and
      this confusion has given rise to a number of historical
      errors.—G. ——M. St. Martin has a learned note (to Le Beau, v.
      261) on the origin of the Vandals. The difficulty appears to be
      in rejecting the close analogy of the name with the Vend or
      Wendish race, who were of Sclavonian, not of Suevian or German,
      origin. M. St. Martin supposes that the different races spread
      from the head of the Adriatic to the Baltic, and even the Veneti,
      on the shores of the Adriatic, the Vindelici, the tribes which
      gave their name to Vindobena, Vindoduna, Vindonissa, were
      branches of the same stock with the Sclavonian Venedi, who at one
      time gave their name to the Baltic; that they all spoke dialects
      of the Wendish language, which still prevails in Carinthia,
      Carniola, part of Bohemia, and Lusatia, and is hardly extinct in
      Mecklenburgh and Pomerania. The Vandal race, once so fearfully
      celebrated in the annals of mankind, has so utterly perished from
      the face of the earth, that we are not aware that any vestiges of
      their language can be traced, so as to throw light on the
      disputed question of their German, their Sclavonian, or
      independent origin. The weight of ancient authority seems against
      M. St. Martin’s opinion. Compare, on the Vandals, Malte Brun.
      394. Also Gibbon’s note, c. xli. n. 38.—M.]

      In the age of the Antonines, the Goths were still seated in
      Prussia. About the reign of Alexander Severus, the Roman province
      of Dacia had already experienced their proximity by frequent and
      destructive inroads. 19 In this interval, therefore, of about
      seventy years we must place the second migration of the Goths
      from the Baltic to the Euxine; but the cause that produced it
      lies concealed among the various motives which actuate the
      conduct of unsettled barbarians. Either a pestilence or a famine,
      a victory or a defeat, an oracle of the gods or the eloquence of
      a daring leader, were sufficient to impel the Gothic arms on the
      milder climates of the south. Besides the influence of a martial
      religion, the numbers and spirit of the Goths were equal to the
      most dangerous adventures. The use of round bucklers and short
      swords rendered them formidable in a close engagement; the manly
      obedience which they yielded to hereditary kings, gave uncommon
      union and stability to their councils; 20 and the renowned Amala,
      the hero of that age, and the tenth ancestor of Theodoric, king
      of Italy, enforced, by the ascendant of personal merit, the
      prerogative of his birth, which he derived from the _Anses_, or
      demigods of the Gothic nation. 21

      19 (return) [ See a fragment of Peter Patricius in the Excerpta
      Legationum and with regard to its probable date, see Tillemont,
      Hist, des Empereurs, tom. iii. p. 346.]

      20 (return) [ Omnium harum gentium insigne, rotunda scuta, breves
      gladii, et erga rages obsequium. Tacit. Germania, c. 43. The
      Goths probably acquired their iron by the commerce of amber.]

      21 (return) [ Jornandes, c. 13, 14.]

      The fame of a great enterprise excited the bravest warriors from
      all the Vandalic states of Germany, many of whom are seen a few
      years afterwards combating under the common standard of the
      Goths. 22 The first motions of the emigrants carried them to the
      banks of the Prypec, a river universally conceived by the
      ancients to be the southern branch of the Borysthenes. 23 The
      windings of that great stream through the plains of Poland and
      Russia gave a direction to their line of march, and a constant
      supply of fresh water and pasturage to their numerous herds of
      cattle. They followed the unknown course of the river, confident
      in their valor, and careless of whatever power might oppose their
      progress. The Bastarnæ and the Venedi were the first who
      presented themselves; and the flower of their youth, either from
      choice or compulsion, increased the Gothic army. The Bastarnæ
      dwelt on the northern side of the Carpathian Mountains: the
      immense tract of land that separated the Bastarnæ from the
      savages of Finland was possessed, or rather wasted, by the
      Venedi; 24 we have some reason to believe that the first of these
      nations, which distinguished itself in the Macedonian war, 25 and
      was afterwards divided into the formidable tribes of the Peucini,
      the Borani, the Carpi, &c., derived its origin from the Germans.
      251 With better authority, a Sarmatian extraction may be assigned
      to the Venedi, who rendered themselves so famous in the middle
      ages. 26 But the confusion of blood and manners on that doubtful
      frontier often perplexed the most accurate observers. 27 As the
      Goths advanced near the Euxine Sea, they encountered a purer race
      of Sarmatians, the Jazyges, the Alani, 271 and the Roxolani; and
      they were probably the first Germans who saw the mouths of the
      Borysthenes, and of the Tanais. If we inquire into the
      characteristic marks of the people of Germany and of Sarmatia, we
      shall discover that those two great portions of human kind were
      principally distinguished by fixed huts or movable tents, by a
      close dress or flowing garments, by the marriage of one or of
      several wives, by a military force, consisting, for the most
      part, either of infantry or cavalry; and above all, by the use of
      the Teutonic, or of the Sclavonian language; the last of which
      has been diffused by conquest, from the confines of Italy to the
      neighborhood of Japan.

      22 (return) [ The Heruli, and the Uregundi or Burgundi, are
      particularly mentioned. See Mascou’s History of the Germans, l.
      v. A passage in the Augustan History, p. 28, seems to allude to
      this great emigration. The Marcomannic war was partly occasioned
      by the pressure of barbarous tribes, who fled before the arms of
      more northern barbarians.]

      23 (return) [ D’Anville, Geographie Ancienne, and the third part
      of his incomparable map of Europe.]

      24 (return) [ Tacit. Germania, c. 46.]

      25 (return) [ Cluver. Germ. Antiqua, l. iii. c. 43.]

      251 (return) [ The Bastarnæ cannot be considered original
      inhabitants of Germany Strabo and Tacitus appear to doubt it;
      Pliny alone calls them Germans: Ptolemy and Dion treat them as
      Scythians, a vague appellation at this period of history; Livy,
      Plutarch, and Diodorus Siculus, call them Gauls, and this is the
      most probable opinion. They descended from the Gauls who entered
      Germany under Signoesus. They are always found associated with
      other Gaulish tribes, such as the Boll, the Taurisci, &c., and
      not to the German tribes. The names of their chiefs or princes,
      Chlonix, Chlondicus. Deldon, are not German names. Those who were
      settled in the island of Peuce in the Danube, took the name of
      Peucini. The Carpi appear in 237 as a Suevian tribe who had made
      an irruption into Mæsia. Afterwards they reappear under the
      Ostrogoths, with whom they were probably blended. Adelung, p.
      236, 278.—G.]

      26 (return) [ The Venedi, the Slavi, and the Antes, were the
      three great tribes of the same people. Jornandes, 24. * Note
      Dagger: They formed the great Sclavonian nation.—G.]

      27 (return) [ Tacitus most assuredly deserves that title, and
      even his cautious suspense is a proof of his diligent inquiries.]

      271 (return) [ Jac. Reineggs supposed that he had found, in the
      mountains of Caucasus, some descendants of the Alani. The Tartars
      call them Edeki-Alan: they speak a peculiar dialect of the
      ancient language of the Tartars of Caucasus. See J. Reineggs’
      Descr. of Caucasus, p. 11, 13.—G. According to Klaproth, they are
      the Ossetes of the present day in Mount Caucasus and were the
      same with the Albanians of antiquity. Klaproth, Hist. de l’Asie,
      p. 180.—M.]




      Chapter X: Emperors Decius, Gallus, Æmilianus, Valerian And
      Gallienus.—Part II.

      The Goths were now in possession of the Ukraine, a country of
      considerable extent and uncommon fertility, intersected with
      navigable rivers, which, from either side, discharge themselves
      into the Borysthenes; and interspersed with large and lofty
      forests of oaks. The plenty of game and fish, the innumerable
      bee-hives deposited in the hollow of old trees, and in the
      cavities of rocks, and forming, even in that rude age, a valuable
      branch of commerce, the size of the cattle, the temperature of
      the air, the aptness of the soil for every species of grain, and
      the luxuriancy of the vegetation, all displayed the liberality of
      Nature, and tempted the industry of man. 28 But the Goths
      withstood all these temptations, and still adhered to a life of
      idleness, of poverty, and of rapine.

      28 (return) [ Genealogical History of the Tartars, p. 593. Mr.
      Bell (vol. ii. p 379) traversed the Ukraine, in his journey from
      Petersburgh to Constantinople. The modern face of the country is
      a just representation of the ancient, since, in the hands of the
      Cossacks, it still remains in a state of nature.]

      The Scythian hordes, which, towards the east, bordered on the new
      settlements of the Goths, presented nothing to their arms, except
      the doubtful chance of an unprofitable victory. But the prospect
      of the Roman territories was far more alluring; and the fields of
      Dacia were covered with rich harvests, sown by the hands of an
      industrious, and exposed to be gathered by those of a warlike,
      people. It is probable that the conquests of Trajan, maintained
      by his successors, less for any real advantage than for ideal
      dignity, had contributed to weaken the empire on that side. The
      new and unsettled province of Dacia was neither strong enough to
      resist, nor rich enough to satiate, the rapaciousness of the
      barbarians. As long as the remote banks of the Niester were
      considered as the boundary of the Roman power, the fortifications
      of the Lower Danube were more carelessly guarded, and the
      inhabitants of Mæsia lived in supine security, fondly conceiving
      themselves at an inaccessible distance from any barbarian
      invaders. The irruptions of the Goths, under the reign of Philip,
      fatally convinced them of their mistake. The king, or leader, of
      that fierce nation, traversed with contempt the province of
      Dacia, and passed both the Niester and the Danube without
      encountering any opposition capable of retarding his progress.
      The relaxed discipline of the Roman troops betrayed the most
      important posts, where they were stationed, and the fear of
      deserved punishment induced great numbers of them to enlist under
      the Gothic standard. The various multitude of barbarians
      appeared, at length, under the walls of Marcianopolis, a city
      built by Trajan in honor of his sister, and at that time the
      capital of the second Mæsia. 29 The inhabitants consented to
      ransom their lives and property by the payment of a large sum of
      money, and the invaders retreated back into their deserts,
      animated, rather than satisfied, with the first success of their
      arms against an opulent but feeble country. Intelligence was soon
      transmitted to the emperor Decius, that Cniva, king of the Goths,
      had passed the Danube a second time, with more considerable
      forces; that his numerous detachments scattered devastation over
      the province of Mæsia, whilst the main body of the army,
      consisting of seventy thousand Germans and Sarmatians, a force
      equal to the most daring achievements, required the presence of
      the Roman monarch, and the exertion of his military power.

      29 (return) [ In the sixteenth chapter of Jornandes, instead of
      secundo Mæsiam we may venture to substitute secundam, the second
      Mæsia, of which Marcianopolis was certainly the capital. (See
      Hierocles de Provinciis, and Wesseling ad locum, p. 636.
      Itinerar.) It is surprising how this palpable error of the scribe
      should escape the judicious correction of Grotius. Note: Luden
      has observed that Jornandes mentions two passages over the
      Danube; this relates to the second irruption into Mæsia.
      Geschichte des T V. ii. p. 448.—M.]

      Decius found the Goths engaged before Nicopolis, one of the many
      monuments of Trajan’s victories. 30 On his approach they raised
      the siege, but with a design only of marching away to a conquest
      of greater importance, the siege of Philippopolis, a city of
      Thrace, founded by the father of Alexander, near the foot of
      Mount Hæmus. 31 Decius followed them through a difficult country,
      and by forced marches; but when he imagined himself at a
      considerable distance from the rear of the Goths, Cniva turned
      with rapid fury on his pursuers. The camp of the Romans was
      surprised and pillaged, and, for the first time, their emperor
      fled in disorder before a troop of half-armed barbarians. After a
      long resistance, Philoppopolis, destitute of succor, was taken by
      storm. A hundred thousand persons are reported to have been
      massacred in the sack of that great city. 32 Many prisoners of
      consequence became a valuable accession to the spoil; and
      Priscus, a brother of the late emperor Philip, blushed not to
      assume the purple, under the protection of the barbarous enemies
      of Rome. 33 The time, however, consumed in that tedious siege,
      enabled Decius to revive the courage, restore the discipline, and
      recruit the numbers of his troops. He intercepted several parties
      of Carpi, and other Germans, who were hastening to share the
      victory of their countrymen, 34 intrusted the passes of the
      mountains to officers of approved valor and fidelity, 35 repaired
      and strengthened the fortifications of the Danube, and exerted
      his utmost vigilance to oppose either the progress or the retreat
      of the Goths. Encouraged by the return of fortune, he anxiously
      waited for an opportunity to retrieve, by a great and decisive
      blow, his own glory, and that of the Roman arms. 36

      30 (return) [ The place is still called Nicop. D’Anville,
      Geographie Ancienne, tom. i. p. 307. The little stream, on whose
      banks it stood, falls into the Danube.]

      31 (return) [ Stephan. Byzant. de Urbibus, p. 740. Wesseling,
      Itinerar. p. 136. Zonaras, by an odd mistake, ascribes the
      foundation of Philippopolis to the immediate predecessor of
      Decius. * Note: Now Philippopolis or Philiba; its situation among
      the hills caused it to be also called Trimontium. D’Anville,
      Geog. Anc. i. 295.—G.]

      32 (return) [ Ammian. xxxi. 5.]

      33 (return) [ Aurel. Victor. c. 29.]

      34 (return) [ Victoriæ Carpicæ, on some medals of Decius,
      insinuate these advantages.]

      35 (return) [ Claudius (who afterwards reigned with so much
      glory) was posted in the pass of Thermopylæ with 200 Dardanians,
      100 heavy and 160 light horse, 60 Cretan archers, and 1000
      well-armed recruits. See an original letter from the emperor to
      his officer, in the Augustan History, p. 200.]

      36 (return) [ Jornandes, c. 16—18. Zosimus, l. i. p. 22. In the
      general account of this war, it is easy to discover the opposite
      prejudices of the Gothic and the Grecian writer. In carelessness
      alone they are alike.]

      At the same time when Decius was struggling with the violence of
      the tempest, his mind, calm and deliberate amidst the tumult of
      war, investigated the more general causes that, since the age of
      the Antonines, had so impetuously urged the decline of the Roman
      greatness. He soon discovered that it was impossible to replace
      that greatness on a permanent basis without restoring public
      virtue, ancient principles and manners, and the oppressed majesty
      of the laws. To execute this noble but arduous design, he first
      resolved to revive the obsolete office of censor; an office
      which, as long as it had subsisted in its pristine integrity, had
      so much contributed to the perpetuity of the state, 37 till it
      was usurped and gradually neglected by the Cæsars. 38 Conscious
      that the favor of the sovereign may confer power, but that the
      esteem of the people can alone bestow authority, he submitted the
      choice of the censor to the unbiased voice of the senate. By
      their unanimous votes, or rather acclamations, Valerian, who was
      afterwards emperor, and who then served with distinction in the
      army of Decius, was declared the most worthy of that exalted
      honor. As soon as the decree of the senate was transmitted to the
      emperor, he assembled a great council in his camp, and before the
      investiture of the censor elect, he apprised him of the
      difficulty and importance of his great office. “Happy Valerian,”
      said the prince to his distinguished subject, “happy in the
      general approbation of the senate and of the Roman republic!
      Accept the censorship of mankind; and judge of our manners. You
      will select those who deserve to continue members of the senate;
      you will restore the equestrian order to its ancient splendor;
      you will improve the revenue, yet moderate the public burdens.
      You will distinguish into regular classes the various and
      infinite multitude of citizens, and accurately view the military
      strength, the wealth, the virtue, and the resources of Rome. Your
      decisions shall obtain the force of laws. The army, the palace,
      the ministers of justice, and the great officers of the empire,
      are all subject to your tribunal. None are exempted, excepting
      only the ordinary consuls, 39 the præfect of the city, the king
      of the sacrifices, and (as long as she preserves her chastity
      inviolate) the eldest of the vestal virgins. Even these few, who
      may not dread the severity, will anxiously solicit the esteem, of
      the Roman censor.” 40

      37 (return) [ Montesquieu, Grandeur et Decadence des Romains, c.
      viii. He illustrates the nature and use of the censorship with
      his usual ingenuity, and with uncommon precision.]

      38 (return) [ Vespasian and Titus were the last censors, (Pliny,
      Hist. Natur vii. 49. Censorinus de Die Natali.) The modesty of
      Trajan refused an honor which he deserved, and his example became
      a law to the Antonines. See Pliny’s Panegyric, c. 45 and 60.]

      39 (return) [ Yet in spite of his exemption, Pompey appeared
      before that tribunal during his consulship. The occasion, indeed,
      was equally singular and honorable. Plutarch in Pomp. p. 630.]

      40 (return) [ See the original speech in the Augustan Hist. p.
      173-174.]

      A magistrate, invested with such extensive powers, would have
      appeared not so much the minister, as the colleague of his
      sovereign. 41 Valerian justly dreaded an elevation so full of
      envy and of suspicion. He modestly argued the alarming greatness
      of the trust, his own insufficiency, and the incurable corruption
      of the times. He artfully insinuated, that the office of censor
      was inseparable from the Imperial dignity, and that the feeble
      hands of a subject were unequal to the support of such an immense
      weight of cares and of power. 42 The approaching event of war
      soon put an end to the prosecution of a project so specious, but
      so impracticable; and whilst it preserved Valerian from the
      danger, saved the emperor Decius from the disappointment, which
      would most probably have attended it. A censor may maintain, he
      can never restore, the morals of a state. It is impossible for
      such a magistrate to exert his authority with benefit, or even
      with effect, unless he is supported by a quick sense of honor and
      virtue in the minds of the people, by a decent reverence for the
      public opinion, and by a train of useful prejudices combating on
      the side of national manners. In a period when these principles
      are annihilated, the censorial jurisdiction must either sink into
      empty pageantry, or be converted into a partial instrument of
      vexatious oppression. 43 It was easier to vanquish the Goths than
      to eradicate the public vices; yet even in the first of these
      enterprises, Decius lost his army and his life.

      41 (return) [ This transaction might deceive Zonaras, who
      supposes that Valerian was actually declared the colleague of
      Decius, l. xii. p. 625.]

      42 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 174. The emperor’s reply is
      omitted.]

      43 (return) [ Such as the attempts of Augustus towards a
      reformation of manness. Tacit. Annal. iii. 24.]

      The Goths were now, on every side, surrounded and pursued by the
      Roman arms. The flower of their troops had perished in the long
      siege of Philippopolis, and the exhausted country could no longer
      afford subsistence for the remaining multitude of licentious
      barbarians. Reduced to this extremity, the Goths would gladly
      have purchased, by the surrender of all their booty and
      prisoners, the permission of an undisturbed retreat. But the
      emperor, confident of victory, and resolving, by the chastisement
      of these invaders, to strike a salutary terror into the nations
      of the North, refused to listen to any terms of accommodation.
      The high-spirited barbarians preferred death to slavery. An
      obscure town of Mæsia, called Forum Terebronii, 44 was the scene
      of the battle. The Gothic army was drawn up in three lines, and
      either from choice or accident, the front of the third line was
      covered by a morass. In the beginning of the action, the son of
      Decius, a youth of the fairest hopes, and already associated to
      the honors of the purple, was slain by an arrow, in the sight of
      his afflicted father; who, summoning all his fortitude,
      admonished the dismayed troops, that the loss of a single soldier
      was of little importance to the republic. 45 The conflict was
      terrible; it was the combat of despair against grief and rage.
      The first line of the Goths at length gave way in disorder; the
      second, advancing to sustain it, shared its fate; and the third
      only remained entire, prepared to dispute the passage of the
      morass, which was imprudently attempted by the presumption of the
      enemy. “Here the fortune of the day turned, and all things became
      adverse to the Romans; the place deep with ooze, sinking under
      those who stood, slippery to such as advanced; their armor heavy,
      the waters deep; nor could they wield, in that uneasy situation,
      their weighty javelins. The barbarians, on the contrary, were
      inured to encounter in the bogs, their persons tall, their spears
      long, such as could wound at a distance.” 46 In this morass the
      Roman army, after an ineffectual struggle, was irrecoverably
      lost; nor could the body of the emperor ever be found. 47 Such
      was the fate of Decius, in the fiftieth year of his age; an
      accomplished prince, active in war and affable in peace; 48 who,
      together with his son, has deserved to be compared, both in life
      and death, with the brightest examples of ancient virtue. 49

      44 (return) [ Tillemont, Histoire des Empereurs, tom. iii. p.
      598. As Zosimus and some of his followers mistake the Danube for
      the Tanais, they place the field of battle in the plains of
      Scythia.]

      45 (return) [ Aurelius Victor allows two distinct actions for the
      deaths of the two Decii; but I have preferred the account of
      Jornandes.]

      46 (return) [ I have ventured to copy from Tacitus (Annal. i. 64)
      the picture of a similar engagement between a Roman army and a
      German tribe.]

      47 (return) [ Jornandes, c. 18. Zosimus, l. i. p. 22, [c. 23.]
      Zonaras, l. xii. p. 627. Aurelius Victor.]

      48 (return) [ The Decii were killed before the end of the year
      two hundred and fifty-one, since the new princes took possession
      of the consulship on the ensuing calends of January.]

      49 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 223, gives them a very honorable
      place among the small number of good emperors who reigned between
      Augustus and Diocletian.]

      This fatal blow humbled, for a very little time, the insolence of
      the legions. They appeared to have patiently expected, and
      submissively obeyed, the decree of the senate which regulated the
      succession to the throne. From a just regard for the memory of
      Decius, the Imperial title was conferred on Hostilianus, his only
      surviving son; but an equal rank, with more effectual power, was
      granted to Gallus, whose experience and ability seemed equal to
      the great trust of guardian to the young prince and the
      distressed empire. 50 The first care of the new emperor was to
      deliver the Illyrian provinces from the intolerable weight of the
      victorious Goths. He consented to leave in their hands the rich
      fruits of their invasion, an immense booty, and what was still
      more disgraceful, a great number of prisoners of the highest
      merit and quality. He plentifully supplied their camp with every
      conveniency that could assuage their angry spirits or facilitate
      their so much wished-for departure; and he even promised to pay
      them annually a large sum of gold, on condition they should never
      afterwards infest the Roman territories by their incursions. 51

      50 (return) [ Hæc ubi Patres comperere.. .. decernunt. Victor in
      Cæsaribus.]

      51 (return) [ Zonaras, l. xii. p. 628.]

      In the age of the Scipios, the most opulent kings of the earth,
      who courted the protection of the victorious commonwealth, were
      gratified with such trifling presents as could only derive a
      value from the hand that bestowed them; an ivory chair, a coarse
      garment of purple, an inconsiderable piece of plate, or a
      quantity of copper coin. 52 After the wealth of nations had
      centred in Rome, the emperors displayed their greatness, and even
      their policy, by the regular exercise of a steady and moderate
      liberality towards the allies of the state. They relieved the
      poverty of the barbarians, honored their merit, and recompensed
      their fidelity. These voluntary marks of bounty were understood
      to flow, not from the fears, but merely from the generosity or
      the gratitude of the Romans; and whilst presents and subsidies
      were liberally distributed among friends and suppliants, they
      were sternly refused to such as claimed them as a debt. 53 But
      this stipulation, of an annual payment to a victorious enemy,
      appeared without disguise in the light of an ignominious tribute;
      the minds of the Romans were not yet accustomed to accept such
      unequal laws from a tribe of barbarians; and the prince, who by a
      necessary concession had probably saved his country, became the
      object of the general contempt and aversion. The death of
      Hostiliamus, though it happened in the midst of a raging
      pestilence, was interpreted as the personal crime of Gallus; 54
      and even the defeat of the later emperor was ascribed by the
      voice of suspicion to the perfidious counsels of his hated
      successor. 55 The tranquillity which the empire enjoyed during
      the first year of his administration, 56 served rather to inflame
      than to appease the public discontent; and as soon as the
      apprehensions of war were removed, the infamy of the peace was
      more deeply and more sensibly felt.

      52 (return) [ A _Sella_, a _Toga_, and a golden _Patera_ of five
      pounds weight, were accepted with joy and gratitude by the
      wealthy king of Egypt. (Livy, xxvii. 4.) _Quina millia Æris_, a
      weight of copper, in value about eighteen pounds sterling, was
      the usual present made to foreign are ambassadors. (Livy, xxxi.
      9.)]

      53 (return) [ See the firmness of a Roman general so late as the
      time of Alexander Severus, in the Excerpta Legationum, p. 25,
      edit. Louvre.]

      54 (return) [ For the plague, see Jornandes, c. 19, and Victor in
      Cæsaribus.]

      55 (return) [ These improbable accusations are alleged by
      Zosimus, l. i. p. 28, 24.]

      56 (return) [ Jornandes, c. 19. The Gothic writer at least
      observed the peace which his victorious countrymen had sworn to
      Gallus.]

      But the Romans were irritated to a still higher degree, when they
      discovered that they had not even secured their repose, though at
      the expense of their honor. The dangerous secret of the wealth
      and weakness of the empire had been revealed to the world. New
      swarms of barbarians, encouraged by the success, and not
      conceiving themselves bound by the obligation of their brethren,
      spread devastation though the Illyrian provinces, and terror as
      far as the gates of Rome. The defence of the monarchy, which
      seemed abandoned by the pusillanimous emperor, was assumed by
      Æmilianus, governor of Pannonia and Mæsia; who rallied the
      scattered forces, and revived the fainting spirits of the troops.
      The barbarians were unexpectedly attacked, routed, chased, and
      pursued beyond the Danube. The victorious leader distributed as a
      donative the money collected for the tribute, and the
      acclamations of the soldiers proclaimed him emperor on the field
      of battle. 57 Gallus, who, careless of the general welfare,
      indulged himself in the pleasures of Italy, was almost in the
      same instant informed of the success, of the revolt, and of the
      rapid approach of his aspiring lieutenant. He advanced to meet
      him as far as the plains of Spoleto. When the armies came in
      sight of each other, the soldiers of Gallus compared the
      ignominious conduct of their sovereign with the glory of his
      rival. They admired the valor of Æmilianus; they were attracted
      by his liberality, for he offered a considerable increase of pay
      to all deserters. 58 The murder of Gallus, and of his son
      Volusianus, put an end to the civil war; and the senate gave a
      legal sanction to the rights of conquest. The letters of
      Æmilianus to that assembly displayed a mixture of moderation and
      vanity. He assured them, that he should resign to their wisdom
      the civil administration; and, contenting himself with the
      quality of their general, would in a short time assert the glory
      of Rome, and deliver the empire from all the barbarians both of
      the North and of the East. 59 His pride was flattered by the
      applause of the senate; and medals are still extant, representing
      him with the name and attributes of Hercules the Victor, and Mars
      the Avenger. 60

      57 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 25, 26.]

      58 (return) [ Victor in Cæsaribus.]

      59 (return) [ Zonaras, l. xii. p. 628.]

      60 (return) [ Banduri Numismata, p. 94.]

      If the new monarch possessed the abilities, he wanted the time,
      necessary to fulfil these splendid promises. Less than four
      months intervened between his victory and his fall. 61 He had
      vanquished Gallus: he sunk under the weight of a competitor more
      formidable than Gallus. That unfortunate prince had sent
      Valerian, already distinguished by the honorable title of censor,
      to bring the legions of Gaul and Germany 62 to his aid. Valerian
      executed that commission with zeal and fidelity; and as he
      arrived too late to save his sovereign, he resolved to revenge
      him. The troops of Æmilianus, who still lay encamped in the
      plains of Spoleto, were awed by the sanctity of his character,
      but much more by the superior strength of his army; and as they
      were now become as incapable of personal attachment as they had
      always been of constitutional principle, they readily imbrued
      their hands in the blood of a prince who so lately had been the
      object of their partial choice. The guilt was theirs, 621 but the
      advantage of it was Valerian’s; who obtained the possession of
      the throne by the means indeed of a civil war, but with a degree
      of innocence singular in that age of revolutions; since he owed
      neither gratitude nor allegiance to his predecessor, whom he
      dethroned.

      61 (return) [ Eutropius, l. ix. c. 6, says tertio mense. Eusebio
      this emperor.]

      62 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 28. Eutropius and Victor station
      Valerian’s army in Rhætia.]

      621 (return) [ Aurelius Victor says that Æmilianus died of a
      natural disorder. Tropius, in speaking of his death, does not say
      that he was assassinated—G.]

      Valerian was about sixty years of age 63 when he was invested
      with the purple, not by the caprice of the populace, or the
      clamors of the army, but by the unanimous voice of the Roman
      world. In his gradual ascent through the honors of the state, he
      had deserved the favor of virtuous princes, and had declared
      himself the enemy of tyrants. 64 His noble birth, his mild but
      unblemished manners, his learning, prudence, and experience, were
      revered by the senate and people; and if mankind (according to
      the observation of an ancient writer) had been left at liberty to
      choose a master, their choice would most assuredly have fallen on
      Valerian. 65 Perhaps the merit of this emperor was inadequate to
      his reputation; perhaps his abilities, or at least his spirit,
      were affected by the languor and coldness of old age. The
      consciousness of his decline engaged him to share the throne with
      a younger and more active associate; 66 the emergency of the
      times demanded a general no less than a prince; and the
      experience of the Roman censor might have directed him where to
      bestow the Imperial purple, as the reward of military merit. But
      instead of making a judicious choice, which would have confirmed
      his reign and endeared his memory, Valerian, consulting only the
      dictates of affection or vanity, immediately invested with the
      supreme honors his son Gallienus, a youth whose effeminate vices
      had been hitherto concealed by the obscurity of a private
      station. The joint government of the father and the son subsisted
      about seven, and the sole administration of Gallienus continued
      about eight, years. But the whole period was one uninterrupted
      series of confusion and calamity. As the Roman empire was at the
      same time, and on every side, attacked by the blind fury of
      foreign invaders, and the wild ambition of domestic usurpers, we
      shall consult order and perspicuity, by pursuing, not so much the
      doubtful arrangement of dates, as the more natural distribution
      of subjects. The most dangerous enemies of Rome, during the
      reigns of Valerian and Gallienus, were, 1. The Franks; 2. The
      Alemanni; 3. The Goths; and, 4. The Persians. Under these general
      appellations, we may comprehend the adventures of less
      considerable tribes, whose obscure and uncouth names would only
      serve to oppress the memory and perplex the attention of the
      reader.

      63 (return) [ He was about seventy at the time of his accession,
      or, as it is more probable, of his death. Hist. August. p. 173.
      Tillemont, Hist. des Empereurs, tom. iii. p. 893, note 1.]

      64 (return) [ Inimicus tyrannorum. Hist. August. p. 173. In the
      glorious struggle of the senate against Maximin, Valerian acted a
      very spirited part. Hist. August. p. 156.]

      65 (return) [ According to the distinction of Victor, he seems to
      have received the title of Imperator from the army, and that of
      Augustus from the senate.]

      66 (return) [ From Victor and from the medals, Tillemont (tom.
      iii. p. 710) very justly infers, that Gallienus was associated to
      the empire about the month of August of the year 253.]

      I. As the posterity of the Franks compose one of the greatest and
      most enlightened nations of Europe, the powers of learning and
      ingenuity have been exhausted in the discovery of their
      unlettered ancestors. To the tales of credulity have succeeded
      the systems of fancy. Every passage has been sifted, every spot
      has been surveyed, that might possibly reveal some faint traces
      of their origin. It has been supposed that Pannonia, 67 that
      Gaul, that the northern parts of Germany, 68 gave birth to that
      celebrated colony of warriors. At length the most rational
      critics, rejecting the fictitious emigrations of ideal
      conquerors, have acquiesced in a sentiment whose simplicity
      persuades us of its truth. 69 They suppose, that about the year
      two hundred and forty, 70 a new confederacy was formed under the
      name of Franks, by the old inhabitants of the Lower Rhine and the
      Weser. 701 The present circle of Westphalia, the Landgraviate of
      Hesse, and the duchies of Brunswick and Luneburg, were the
      ancient seat of the Chauci who, in their inaccessible morasses,
      defied the Roman arms; 71 of the Cherusci, proud of the fame of
      Arminius; of the Catti, formidable by their firm and intrepid
      infantry; and of several other tribes of inferior power and
      renown. 72 The love of liberty was the ruling passion of these
      Germans; the enjoyment of it their best treasure; the word that
      expressed that enjoyment the most pleasing to their ear. They
      deserved, they assumed, they maintained the honorable epithet of
      Franks, or Freemen; which concealed, though it did not
      extinguish, the peculiar names of the several states of the
      confederacy. 73 Tacit consent, and mutual advantage, dictated the
      first laws of the union; it was gradually cemented by habit and
      experience. The league of the Franks may admit of some comparison
      with the Helvetic body; in which every canton, retaining its
      independent sovereignty, consults with its brethren in the common
      cause, without acknowledging the authority of any supreme head or
      representative assembly. 74 But the principle of the two
      confederacies was extremely different. A peace of two hundred
      years has rewarded the wise and honest policy of the Swiss. An
      inconstant spirit, the thirst of rapine, and a disregard to the
      most solemn treaties, disgraced the character of the Franks.

      67 (return) [ Various systems have been formed to explain a
      difficult passage in Gregory of Tours, l. ii. c. 9.]

      68 (return) [ The Geographer of Ravenna, i. 11, by mentioning
      Mauringania, on the confines of Denmark, as the ancient seat of
      the Franks, gave birth to an ingenious system of Leibritz.]

      69 (return) [ See Cluver. Germania Antiqua, l. iii. c. 20. M.
      Freret, in the Memoires de l’Academie des Inscriptions, tom.
      xviii.]

      70 (return) [ Most probably under the reign of Gordian, from an
      accidental circumstance fully canvassed by Tillemont, tom. iii.
      p. 710, 1181.]

      701 (return) [ The confederation of the Franks appears to have
      been formed, 1. Of the Chauci. 2. Of the Sicambri, the
      inhabitants of the duchy of Berg. 3. Of the Attuarii, to the
      north of the Sicambri, in the principality of Waldeck, between
      the Dimel and the Eder. 4. Of the Bructeri, on the banks of the
      Lippe, and in the Hartz. 5. Of the Chamavii, the Gambrivii of
      Tacitua, who were established, at the time of the Frankish
      confederation, in the country of the Bructeri. 6. Of the Catti,
      in Hessia.—G. The Salii and Cherasci are added. Greenwood’s Hist.
      of Germans, i 193.—M.]

      71 (return) [Plin. Hist. Natur. xvi. l. The Panegyrists
      frequently allude to the morasses of the Franks.]

      72 (return) [ Tacit. Germania, c. 30, 37.]

      73 (return) [ In a subsequent period, most of those old names are
      occasionally mentioned. See some vestiges of them in Cluver.
      Germ. Antiq. l. iii.]

      74 (return) [ Simler de Republica Helvet. cum notis Fuselin.]




      Chapter X: Emperors Decius, Gallus, Æmilianus, Valerian And
      Gallienus.—Part III.

      The Romans had long experienced the daring valor of the people of
      Lower Germany. The union of their strength threatened Gaul with a
      more formidable invasion, and required the presence of Gallienus,
      the heir and colleague of Imperial power. 75 Whilst that prince,
      and his infant son Salonius, displayed, in the court of Treves,
      the majesty of the empire, its armies were ably conducted by
      their general, Posthumus, who, though he afterwards betrayed the
      family of Valerian, was ever faithful to the great interests of
      the monarchy. The treacherous language of panegyrics and medals
      darkly announces a long series of victories. Trophies and titles
      attest (if such evidence can attest) the fame of Posthumus, who
      is repeatedly styled the Conqueror of the Germans, and the Savior
      of Gaul. 76

      75 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 27.]

      76 (return) [ M. de Brequigny (in the Memoires de l’Academie,
      tom. xxx.) has given us a very curious life of Posthumus. A
      series of the Augustan History from Medals and Inscriptions has
      been more than once planned, and is still much wanted. * Note: M.
      Eckhel, Keeper of the Cabinet of Medals, and Professor of
      Antiquities at Vienna, lately deceased, has supplied this want by
      his excellent work, Doctrina veterum Nummorum, conscripta a Jos.
      Eckhel, 8 vol. in 4to Vindobona, 1797.—G. Captain Smyth has
      likewise printed (privately) a valuable Descriptive Catologue of
      a series of Large Brass Medals of this period Bedford, 1834.—M.
      1845.]

      But a single fact, the only one indeed of which we have any
      distinct knowledge, erases, in a great measure, these monuments
      of vanity and adulation. The Rhine, though dignified with the
      title of Safeguard of the provinces, was an imperfect barrier
      against the daring spirit of enterprise with which the Franks
      were actuated. Their rapid devastations stretched from the river
      to the foot of the Pyrenees; nor were they stopped by those
      mountains. Spain, which had never dreaded, was unable to resist,
      the inroads of the Germans. During twelve years, the greatest
      part of the reign of Gallienus, that opulent country was the
      theatre of unequal and destructive hostilities. Tarragona, the
      flourishing capital of a peaceful province, was sacked and almost
      destroyed; 77 and so late as the days of Orosius, who wrote in
      the fifth century, wretched cottages, scattered amidst the ruins
      of magnificent cities, still recorded the rage of the barbarians.
      78 When the exhausted country no longer supplied a variety of
      plunder, the Franks seized on some vessels in the ports of Spain,
      79 and transported themselves into Mauritania. The distant
      province was astonished with the fury of these barbarians, who
      seemed to fall from a new world, as their name, manners, and
      complexion, were equally unknown on the coast of Africa. 80

      77 (return) [ Aurel. Victor, c. 33. Instead of Pœne direpto,
      both the sense and the expression require deleto; though indeed,
      for different reasons, it is alike difficult to correct the text
      of the best, and of the worst, writers.]

      78 (return) [ In the time of Ausonius (the end of the fourth
      century) Ilerda or Lerida was in a very ruinous state, (Auson.
      Epist. xxv. 58,) which probably was the consequence of this
      invasion.]

      79 (return) [ Valesius is therefore mistaken in supposing that
      the Franks had invaded Spain by sea.]

      80 (return) [ Aurel. Victor. Eutrop. ix. 6.]

      II. In that part of Upper Saxony, beyond the Elbe, which is at
      present called the Marquisate of Lusace, there existed, in
      ancient times, a sacred wood, the awful seat of the superstition
      of the Suevi. None were permitted to enter the holy precincts,
      without confessing, by their servile bonds and suppliant posture,
      the immediate presence of the sovereign Deity. 81 Patriotism
      contributed, as well as devotion, to consecrate the Sonnenwald,
      or wood of the Semnones. 82 It was universally believed, that the
      nation had received its first existence on that sacred spot. At
      stated periods, the numerous tribes who gloried in the Suevic
      blood, resorted thither by their ambassadors; and the memory of
      their common extraction was perpetrated by barbaric rites and
      human sacrifices. The wide-extended name of Suevi filled the
      interior countries of Germany, from the banks of the Oder to
      those of the Danube. They were distinguished from the other
      Germans by their peculiar mode of dressing their long hair, which
      they gathered into a rude knot on the crown of the head; and they
      delighted in an ornament that showed their ranks more lofty and
      terrible in the eyes of the enemy. 83 Jealous as the Germans were
      of military renown, they all confessed the superior valor of the
      Suevi; and the tribes of the Usipetes and Tencteri, who, with a
      vast army, encountered the dictator Cæsar, declared that they
      esteemed it not a disgrace to have fled before a people to whose
      arms the immortal gods themselves were unequal. 84

      81 (return) [ Tacit.Germania, 38.]

      82 (return) [ Cluver. Germ. Antiq. iii. 25.]

      83 (return) [ Sic Suevi a ceteris Germanis, sic Suerorum ingenui
      a servis separantur. A proud separation!]

      84 (return) [ Cæsar in Bello Gallico, iv. 7.]

      In the reign of the emperor Caracalla, an innumerable swarm of
      Suevi appeared on the banks of the Main, and in the neighborhood
      of the Roman provinces, in quest either of food, of plunder, or
      of glory. 85 The hasty army of volunteers gradually coalesced
      into a great and permanent nation, and, as it was composed from
      so many different tribes, assumed the name of Alemanni, 851 or
      _Allmen_, to denote at once their various lineage and their
      common bravery. 86 The latter was soon felt by the Romans in many
      a hostile inroad. The Alemanni fought chiefly on horseback; but
      their cavalry was rendered still more formidable by a mixture of
      light infantry, selected from the bravest and most active of the
      youth, whom frequent exercise had inured to accompany the
      horsemen in the longest march, the most rapid charge, or the most
      precipitate retreat. 87

      85 (return) [ Victor in Caracal. Dion Cassius, lxvii. p. 1350.]

      851 (return) [ The nation of the Alemanni was not originally
      formed by the Suavi properly so called; these have always
      preserved their own name. Shortly afterwards they made (A. D.
      357) an irruption into Rhætia, and it was not long after that
      they were reunited with the Alemanni. Still they have always been
      a distinct people; at the present day, the people who inhabit the
      north-west of the Black Forest call themselves Schwaben,
      Suabians, Sueves, while those who inhabit near the Rhine, in
      Ortenau, the Brisgaw, the Margraviate of Baden, do not consider
      themselves Suabians, and are by origin Alemanni. The Teucteri and
      the Usipetæ, inhabitants of the interior and of the north of
      Westphalia, formed, says Gatterer, the nucleus of the Alemannic
      nation; they occupied the country where the name of the Alemanni
      first appears, as conquered in 213, by Caracalla. They were well
      trained to fight on horseback, (according to Tacitus, Germ. c.
      32;) and Aurelius Victor gives the same praise to the Alemanni:
      finally, they never made part of the Frankish league. The
      Alemanni became subsequently a centre round which gathered a
      multitude of German tribes, See Eumen. Panegyr. c. 2. Amm. Marc.
      xviii. 2, xxix. 4.—G. ——The question whether the Suevi was a
      generic name comprehending the clans which peopled central
      Germany, is rather hastily decided by M. Guizot Mr. Greenwood,
      who has studied the modern German writers on their own origin,
      supposes the Suevi, Alemanni, and Marcomanni, one people, under
      different appellations. History of Germany, vol i.—M.]

      86 (return) [ This etymology (far different from those which
      amuse the fancy of the learned) is preserved by Asinius
      Quadratus, an original historian, quoted by Agathias, i. c. 5.]

      87 (return) [ The Suevi engaged Cæsar in this manner, and the
      manœuvre deserved the approbation of the conqueror, (in Bello
      Gallico, i. 48.)]

      This warlike people of Germans had been astonished by the immense
      preparations of Alexander Severus; they were dismayed by the arms
      of his successor, a barbarian equal in valor and fierceness to
      themselves. But still hovering on the frontiers of the empire,
      they increased the general disorder that ensued after the death
      of Decius. They inflicted severe wounds on the rich provinces of
      Gaul; they were the first who removed the veil that covered the
      feeble majesty of Italy. A numerous body of the Alemanni
      penetrated across the Danube and through the Rhætian Alps into
      the plains of Lombardy, advanced as far as Ravenna, and displayed
      the victorious banners of barbarians almost in sight of Rome. 88

      88 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 215, 216. Dexippus in the
      Excerpts. Legationam, p. 8. Hieronym. Chron. Orosius, vii. 22.]

      The insult and the danger rekindled in the senate some sparks of
      their ancient virtue. Both the emperors were engaged in far
      distant wars, Valerian in the East, and Gallienus on the Rhine.
      All the hopes and resources of the Romans were in themselves. In
      this emergency, the senators resumed the defence of the republic,
      drew out the Prætorian guards, who had been left to garrison the
      capital, and filled up their numbers, by enlisting into the
      public service the stoutest and most willing of the Plebeians.
      The Alemanni, astonished with the sudden appearance of an army
      more numerous than their own, retired into Germany, laden with
      spoil; and their retreat was esteemed as a victory by the
      unwarlike Romans. 89

      89 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 34.]

      When Gallienus received the intelligence that his capital was
      delivered from the barbarians, he was much less delighted than
      alarmed with the courage of the senate, since it might one day
      prompt them to rescue the public from domestic tyranny as well as
      from foreign invasion. His timid ingratitude was published to his
      subjects, in an edict which prohibited the senators from
      exercising any military employment, and even from approaching the
      camps of the legions. But his fears were groundless. The rich and
      luxurious nobles, sinking into their natural character, accepted,
      as a favor, this disgraceful exemption from military service; and
      as long as they were indulged in the enjoyment of their baths,
      their theatres, and their villas, they cheerfully resigned the
      more dangerous cares of empire to the rough hands of peasants and
      soldiers. 90

      90 (return) [ Aurel. Victor, in Gallieno et Probo. His complaints
      breathe as uncommon spirit of freedom.]

      Another invasion of the Alemanni, of a more formidable aspect,
      but more glorious event, is mentioned by a writer of the lower
      empire. Three hundred thousand are said to have been vanquished,
      in a battle near Milan, by Gallienus in person, at the head of
      only ten thousand Romans. 91 We may, however, with great
      probability, ascribe this incredible victory either to the
      credulity of the historian, or to some exaggerated exploits of
      one of the emperor’s lieutenants. It was by arms of a very
      different nature, that Gallienus endeavored to protect Italy from
      the fury of the Germans. He espoused Pipa, the daughter of a king
      of the Marcomanni, a Suevic tribe, which was often confounded
      with the Alemanni in their wars and conquests. 92 To the father,
      as the price of his alliance, he granted an ample settlement in
      Pannonia. The native charms of unpolished beauty seem to have
      fixed the daughter in the affections of the inconstant emperor,
      and the bands of policy were more firmly connected by those of
      love. But the haughty prejudice of Rome still refused the name of
      marriage to the profane mixture of a citizen and a barbarian; and
      has stigmatized the German princess with the opprobrious title of
      concubine of Gallienus. 93

      91 (return) [ Zonaras, l. xii. p. 631.]

      92 (return) [ One of the Victors calls him king of the
      Marcomanni; the other of the Germans.]

      93 (return) [ See Tillemont, Hist. des Empereurs, tom. iii. p.
      398, &c.]

      III. We have already traced the emigration of the Goths from
      Scandinavia, or at least from Prussia, to the mouth of the
      Borysthenes, and have followed their victorious arms from the
      Borysthenes to the Danube. Under the reigns of Valerian and
      Gallienus, the frontier of the last-mentioned river was
      perpetually infested by the inroads of Germans and Sarmatians;
      but it was defended by the Romans with more than usual firmness
      and success. The provinces that were the seat of war, recruited
      the armies of Rome with an inexhaustible supply of hardy
      soldiers; and more than one of these Illyrian peasants attained
      the station, and displayed the abilities, of a general. Though
      flying parties of the barbarians, who incessantly hovered on the
      banks of the Danube, penetrated sometimes to the confines of
      Italy and Macedonia, their progress was commonly checked, or
      their return intercepted, by the Imperial lieutenants. 94 But the
      great stream of the Gothic hostilities was diverted into a very
      different channel. The Goths, in their new settlement of the
      Ukraine, soon became masters of the northern coast of the Euxine:
      to the south of that inland sea were situated the soft and
      wealthy provinces of Asia Minor, which possessed all that could
      attract, and nothing that could resist, a barbarian conqueror.

      94 (return) [ See the lives of Claudius, Aurelian, and Probus, in
      the Augustan History.]

      The banks of the Borysthenes are only sixty miles distant from
      the narrow entrance 95 of the peninsula of Crim Tartary, known to
      the ancients under the name of Chersonesus Taurica. 96 On that
      inhospitable shore, Euripides, embellishing with exquisite art
      the tales of antiquity, has placed the scene of one of his most
      affecting tragedies. 97 The bloody sacrifices of Diana, the
      arrival of Orestes and Pylades, and the triumph of virtue and
      religion over savage fierceness, serve to represent an historical
      truth, that the Tauri, the original inhabitants of the peninsula,
      were, in some degree, reclaimed from their brutal manners by a
      gradual intercourse with the Grecian colonies, which settled
      along the maritime coast. The little kingdom of Bosphorus, whose
      capital was situated on the Straits, through which the Mæotis
      communicates itself to the Euxine, was composed of degenerate
      Greeks and half-civilized barbarians. It subsisted, as an
      independent state, from the time of the Peloponnesian war, 98 was
      at last swallowed up by the ambition of Mithridates, 99 and, with
      the rest of his dominions, sunk under the weight of the Roman
      arms. From the reign of Augustus, 100 the kings of Bosphorus were
      the humble, but not useless, allies of the empire. By presents,
      by arms, and by a slight fortification drawn across the Isthmus,
      they effectually guarded, against the roving plunderers of
      Sarmatia, the access of a country which, from its peculiar
      situation and convenient harbors, commanded the Euxine Sea and
      Asia Minor. 101 As long as the sceptre was possessed by a lineal
      succession of kings, they acquitted themselves of their important
      charge with vigilance and success. Domestic factions, and the
      fears, or private interest, of obscure usurpers, who seized on
      the vacant throne, admitted the Goths into the heart of
      Bosphorus. With the acquisition of a superfluous waste of fertile
      soil, the conquerors obtained the command of a naval force,
      sufficient to transport their armies to the coast of Asia. 102
      These ships used in the navigation of the Euxine were of a very
      singular construction. They were slight flat-bottomed barks
      framed of timber only, without the least mixture of iron, and
      occasionally covered with a shelving roof, on the appearance of a
      tempest. 103 In these floating houses, the Goths carelessly
      trusted themselves to the mercy of an unknown sea, under the
      conduct of sailors pressed into the service, and whose skill and
      fidelity were equally suspicious. But the hopes of plunder had
      banished every idea of danger, and a natural fearlessness of
      temper supplied in their minds the more rational confidence,
      which is the just result of knowledge and experience. Warriors of
      such a daring spirit must have often murmured against the
      cowardice of their guides, who required the strongest assurances
      of a settled calm before they would venture to embark; and would
      scarcely ever be tempted to lose sight of the land. Such, at
      least, is the practice of the modern Turks; 104 and they are
      probably not inferior, in the art of navigation, to the ancient
      inhabitants of Bosphorus.

      95 (return) [ It is about half a league in breadth. Genealogical
      History of the Tartars, p 598.]

      96 (return) [ M. de Peyssonel, who had been French Consul at
      Caffa, in his Observations sur les Peuples Barbares, que ont
      habite les bords du Danube]

      97 (return) [ Eeripides in Iphigenia in Taurid.]

      98 (return) [ Strabo, l. vii. p. 309. The first kings of
      Bosphorus were the allies of Athens.]

      99 (return) [ Appian in Mithridat.]

      100 (return) [ It was reduced by the arms of Agrippa. Orosius,
      vi. 21. Eu tropius, vii. 9. The Romans once advanced within three
      days’ march of the Tanais. Tacit. Annal. xii. 17.]

      101 (return) [ See the Toxaris of Lucian, if we credit the
      sincerity and the virtues of the Scythian, who relates a great
      war of his nation against the kings of Bosphorus.]

      102 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 28.]

      103 (return) [ Strabo, l. xi. Tacit. Hist. iii. 47. They were
      called Camarœ.]

      104 (return) [ See a very natural picture of the Euxine
      navigation, in the xvith letter of Tournefort.]

      The fleet of the Goths, leaving the coast of Circassia on the
      left hand, first appeared before Pityus, 105 the utmost limits of
      the Roman provinces; a city provided with a convenient port, and
      fortified with a strong wall. Here they met with a resistance
      more obstinate than they had reason to expect from the feeble
      garrison of a distant fortress. They were repulsed; and their
      disappointment seemed to diminish the terror of the Gothic name.
      As long as Successianus, an officer of superior rank and merit,
      defended that frontier, all their efforts were ineffectual; but
      as soon as he was removed by Valerian to a more honorable but
      less important station, they resumed the attack of Pityus; and by
      the destruction of that city, obliterated the memory of their
      former disgrace. 106

      105 (return) [ Arrian places the frontier garrison at Dioscurias,
      or Sebastopolis, forty-four miles to the east of Pityus. The
      garrison of Phasis consisted in his time of only four hundred
      foot. See the Periplus of the Euxine. * Note: Pityus is
      Pitchinda, according to D’Anville, ii. 115.—G. Rather Boukoun.—M.
      Dioscurias is Iskuriah.—G.]

      106 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 30.]

      Circling round the eastern extremity of the Euxine Sea, the
      navigation from Pityus to Trebizond is about three hundred miles.
      107 The course of the Goths carried them in sight of the country
      of Colchis, so famous by the expedition of the Argonauts; and
      they even attempted, though without success, to pillage a rich
      temple at the mouth of the River Phasis. Trebizond, celebrated in
      the retreat of the ten thousand as an ancient colony of Greeks,
      108 derived its wealth and splendor from the magnificence of the
      emperor Hadrian, who had constructed an artificial port on a
      coast left destitute by nature of secure harbors. 109 The city
      was large and populous; a double enclosure of walls seemed to
      defy the fury of the Goths, and the usual garrison had been
      strengthened by a reënforcement of ten thousand men. But there
      are not any advantages capable of supplying the absence of
      discipline and vigilance. The numerous garrison of Trebizond,
      dissolved in riot and luxury, disdained to guard their
      impregnable fortifications. The Goths soon discovered the supine
      negligence of the besieged, erected a lofty pile of fascines,
      ascended the walls in the silence of the night, and entered the
      defenceless city sword in hand. A general massacre of the people
      ensued, whilst the affrighted soldiers escaped through the
      opposite gates of the town. The most holy temples, and the most
      splendid edifices, were involved in a common destruction. The
      booty that fell into the hands of the Goths was immense: the
      wealth of the adjacent countries had been deposited in Trebizond,
      as in a secure place of refuge. The number of captives was
      incredible, as the victorious barbarians ranged without
      opposition through the extensive province of Pontus. 110 The rich
      spoils of Trebizond filled a great fleet of ships that had been
      found in the port. The robust youth of the sea-coast were chained
      to the oar; and the Goths, satisfied with the success of their
      first naval expedition, returned in triumph to their new
      establishment in the kingdom of Bosphorus. 111

      107 (return) [ Arrian (in Periplo Maris Euxine, p. 130) calls the
      distance 2610 stadia.]

      108 (return) [ Xenophon, Anabasis, l. iv. p. 348, edit.
      Hutchinson. Note: Fallmerayer (Geschichte des Kaiserthums von
      Trapezunt, p. 6, &c) assigns a very ancient date to the first
      (Pelasgic) foundation of Trapezun (Trebizond)—M.]

      109 (return) [ Arrian, p. 129. The general observation is
      Tournefort’s.]

      110 (return) [ See an epistle of Gregory Thaumaturgus, bishop of
      Neo-Cæoarea, quoted by Mascou, v. 37.]

      111 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 32, 33.]

      The second expedition of the Goths was undertaken with greater
      powers of men and ships; but they steered a different course,
      and, disdaining the exhausted provinces of Pontus, followed the
      western coast of the Euxine, passed before the wide mouths of the
      Borysthenes, the Niester, and the Danube, and increasing their
      fleet by the capture of a great number of fishing barks, they
      approached the narrow outlet through which the Euxine Sea pours
      its waters into the Mediterranean, and divides the continents of
      Europe and Asia. The garrison of Chalcedon was encamped near the
      temple of Jupiter Urius, on a promontory that commanded the
      entrance of the Strait; and so inconsiderable were the dreaded
      invasions of the barbarians that this body of troops surpassed in
      number the Gothic army. But it was in numbers alone that they
      surpassed it. They deserted with precipitation their advantageous
      post, and abandoned the town of Chalcedon, most plentifully
      stored with arms and money, to the discretion of the conquerors.
      Whilst they hesitated whether they should prefer the sea or land,
      Europe or Asia, for the scene of their hostilities, a perfidious
      fugitive pointed out Nicomedia, 1111 once the capital of the
      kings of Bithynia, as a rich and easy conquest. He guided the
      march, which was only sixty miles from the camp of Chalcedon, 112
      directed the resistless attack, and partook of the booty; for the
      Goths had learned sufficient policy to reward the traitor whom
      they detested. Nice, Prusa, Apamæa, Cius, 1121 cities that had
      sometimes rivalled, or imitated, the splendor of Nicomedia, were
      involved in the same calamity, which, in a few weeks, raged
      without control through the whole province of Bithynia. Three
      hundred years of peace, enjoyed by the soft inhabitants of Asia,
      had abolished the exercise of arms, and removed the apprehension
      of danger. The ancient walls were suffered to moulder away, and
      all the revenue of the most opulent cities was reserved for the
      construction of baths, temples, and theatres. 113

      1111 (return) [ It has preserved its name, joined to the
      preposition of place in that of Nikmid. D’Anv. Geog. Anc. ii.
      28.—G.]

      112 (return) [ Itiner. Hierosolym. p. 572. Wesseling.]

      1121 (return) [ Now Isnik, Bursa, Mondania Ghio or Kemlik D’Anv.
      ii. 23.—G.]

      113 (return) [ Zosimus, l.. p. 32, 33.]

      When the city of Cyzicus withstood the utmost effort of
      Mithridates, 114 it was distinguished by wise laws, a naval power
      of two hundred galleys, and three arsenals, of arms, of military
      engines, and of corn. 115 It was still the seat of wealth and
      luxury; but of its ancient strength, nothing remained except the
      situation, in a little island of the Propontis, connected with
      the continent of Asia only by two bridges. From the recent sack
      of Prusa, the Goths advanced within eighteen miles 116 of the
      city, which they had devoted to destruction; but the ruin of
      Cyzicus was delayed by a fortunate accident. The season was
      rainy, and the Lake Apolloniates, the reservoir of all the
      springs of Mount Olympus, rose to an uncommon height. The little
      river of Rhyndacus, which issues from the lake, swelled into a
      broad and rapid stream, and stopped the progress of the Goths.
      Their retreat to the maritime city of Heraclea, where the fleet
      had probably been stationed, was attended by a long train of
      wagons, laden with the spoils of Bithynia, and was marked by the
      flames of Nico and Nicomedia, which they wantonly burnt. 117 Some
      obscure hints are mentioned of a doubtful combat that secured
      their retreat. 118 But even a complete victory would have been of
      little moment, as the approach of the autumnal equinox summoned
      them to hasten their return. To navigate the Euxine before the
      month of May, or after that of September, is esteemed by the
      modern Turks the most unquestionable instance of rashness and
      folly. 119

      114 (return) [ He besieged the place with 400 galleys, 150,000
      foot, and a numerous cavalry. See Plutarch in Lucul. Appian in
      Mithridat Cicero pro Lege Manilia, c. 8.]

      115 (return) [ Strabo, l. xii. p. 573.]

      116 (return) [ Pocock’s Description of the East, l. ii. c. 23,
      24.]

      117 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 33.]

      118 (return) [ Syncellus tells an unintelligible story of Prince
      Odenathus, who defeated the Goths, and who was killed by Prince
      Odenathus.]

      119 (return) [Footnote 119: Voyages de Chardin, tom. i. p. 45. He
      sailed with the Turks from Constantinople to Caffa.]

      When we are informed that the third fleet, equipped by the Goths
      in the ports of Bosphorus, consisted of five hundred sails of
      ships, 120 our ready imagination instantly computes and
      multiplies the formidable armament; but, as we are assured by the
      judicious Strabo, 121 that the piratical vessels used by the
      barbarians of Pontus and the Lesser Scythia, were not capable of
      containing more than twenty-five or thirty men we may safely
      affirm, that fifteen thousand warriors, at the most, embarked in
      this great expedition. Impatient of the limits of the Euxine,
      they steered their destructive course from the Cimmerian to the
      Thracian Bosphorus. When they had almost gained the middle of the
      Straits, they were suddenly driven back to the entrance of them;
      till a favorable wind, springing up the next day, carried them in
      a few hours into the placid sea, or rather lake, of the
      Propontis. Their landing on the little island of Cyzicus was
      attended with the ruin of that ancient and noble city. From
      thence issuing again through the narrow passage of the
      Hellespont, they pursued their winding navigation amidst the
      numerous islands scattered over the Archipelago, or the Ægean
      Sea. The assistance of captives and deserters must have been very
      necessary to pilot their vessels, and to direct their various
      incursions, as well on the coast of Greece as on that of Asia. At
      length the Gothic fleet anchored in the port of Piræus, five
      miles distant from Athens, 122 which had attempted to make some
      preparations for a vigorous defence. Cleodamus, one of the
      engineers employed by the emperor’s orders to fortify the
      maritime cities against the Goths, had already begun to repair
      the ancient walls, fallen to decay since the time of Scylla. The
      efforts of his skill were ineffectual, and the barbarians became
      masters of the native seat of the muses and the arts. But while
      the conquerors abandoned themselves to the license of plunder and
      intemperance, their fleet, that lay with a slender guard in the
      harbor of Piræus, was unexpectedly attacked by the brave
      Dexippus, who, flying with the engineer Cleodamus from the sack
      of Athens, collected a hasty band of volunteers, peasants as well
      as soldiers, and in some measure avenged the calamities of his
      country. 123

      120 (return) [ Syncellus (p. 382) speaks of this expedition, as
      undertaken by the Heruli.]

      121 (return) [ Strabo, l. xi. p. 495.]

      122 (return) [ Plin. Hist. Natur. iii. 7.]

      123 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 181. Victor, c. 33. Orosius, vii.
      42. Zosimus, l. i. p. 35. Zonaras, l. xii. 635. Syncellus, p.
      382. It is not without some attention, that we can explain and
      conciliate their imperfect hints. We can still discover some
      traces of the partiality of Dexippus, in the relation of his own
      and his countrymen’s exploits. * Note: According to a new
      fragment of Dexippus, published by Mai, the 2000 men took up a
      strong position in a mountainous and woods district, and kept up
      a harassing warfare. He expresses a hope of being speedily joined
      by the Imperial fleet. Dexippus in rov. Byzantinorum Collect a
      Niebuhr, p. 26, 8—M.]

      But this exploit, whatever lustre it might shed on the declining
      age of Athens, served rather to irritate than to subdue the
      undaunted spirit of the northern invaders. A general
      conflagration blazed out at the same time in every district of
      Greece. Thebes and Argos, Corinth and Sparta, which had formerly
      waged such memorable wars against each other, were now unable to
      bring an army into the field, or even to defend their ruined
      fortifications. The rage of war, both by land and by sea, spread
      from the eastern point of Sunium to the western coast of Epirus.
      The Goths had already advanced within sight of Italy, when the
      approach of such imminent danger awakened the indolent Gallienus
      from his dream of pleasure. The emperor appeared in arms; and his
      presence seems to have checked the ardor, and to have divided the
      strength, of the enemy. Naulobatus, a chief of the Heruli,
      accepted an honorable capitulation, entered with a large body of
      his countrymen into the service of Rome, and was invested with
      the ornaments of the consular dignity, which had never before
      been profaned by the hands of a barbarian. 124 Great numbers of
      the Goths, disgusted with the perils and hardships of a tedious
      voyage, broke into Mæsia, with a design of forcing their way over
      the Danube to their settlements in the Ukraine. The wild attempt
      would have proved inevitable destruction, if the discord of the
      Roman generals had not opened to the barbarians the means of an
      escape. 125 The small remainder of this destroying host returned
      on board their vessels; and measuring back their way through the
      Hellespont and the Bosphorus, ravaged in their passage the shores
      of Troy, whose fame, immortalized by Homer, will probably survive
      the memory of the Gothic conquests. As soon as they found
      themselves in safety within the basin of the Euxine, they landed
      at Anchialus in Thrace, near the foot of Mount Hæmus; and, after
      all their toils, indulged themselves in the use of those pleasant
      and salutary hot baths. What remained of the voyage was a short
      and easy navigation. 126 Such was the various fate of this third
      and greatest of their naval enterprises. It may seem difficult to
      conceive how the original body of fifteen thousand warriors could
      sustain the losses and divisions of so bold an adventure. But as
      their numbers were gradually wasted by the sword, by shipwrecks,
      and by the influence of a warm climate, they were perpetually
      renewed by troops of banditti and deserters, who flocked to the
      standard of plunder, and by a crowd of fugitive slaves, often of
      German or Sarmatian extraction, who eagerly seized the glorious
      opportunity of freedom and revenge. In these expeditions, the
      Gothic nation claimed a superior share of honor and danger; but
      the tribes that fought under the Gothic banners are sometimes
      distinguished and sometimes confounded in the imperfect histories
      of that age; and as the barbarian fleets seemed to issue from the
      mouth of the Tanais, the vague but familiar appellation of
      Scythians was frequently bestowed on the mixed multitude. 127

      124 (return) [Syncellus, p. 382. This body of Heruli was for a
      long time faithful and famous.]

      125 (return) [ Claudius, who commanded on the Danube, thought
      with propriety and acted with spirit. His colleague was jealous
      of his fame Hist. August. p. 181.]

      126 (return) [ Jornandes, c. 20.]

      127 (return) [ Zosimus and the Greeks (as the author of the
      Philopatris) give the name of Scythians to those whom Jornandes,
      and the Latin writers, constantly represent as Goths.]




      Chapter X: Emperors Decius, Gallus, Æmilianus, Valerian And
      Gallienus.—Part IV.

      In the general calamities of mankind, the death of an individual,
      however exalted, the ruin of an edifice, however famous, are
      passed over with careless inattention. Yet we cannot forget that
      the temple of Diana at Ephesus, after having risen with
      increasing splendor from seven repeated misfortunes, 128 was
      finally burnt by the Goths in their third naval invasion. The
      arts of Greece, and the wealth of Asia, had conspired to erect
      that sacred and magnificent structure. It was supported by a
      hundred and twenty-seven marble columns of the Ionic order. They
      were the gifts of devout monarchs, and each was sixty feet high.
      The altar was adorned with the masterly sculptures of Praxiteles,
      who had, perhaps, selected from the favorite legends of the place
      the birth of the divine children of Latona, the concealment of
      Apollo after the slaughter of the Cyclops, and the clemency of
      Bacchus to the vanquished Amazons. 129 Yet the length of the
      temple of Ephesus was only four hundred and twenty-five feet,
      about two thirds of the measure of the church of St. Peter’s at
      Rome. 130 In the other dimensions, it was still more inferior to
      that sublime production of modern architecture. The spreading
      arms of a Christian cross require a much greater breadth than the
      oblong temples of the Pagans; and the boldest artists of
      antiquity would have been startled at the proposal of raising in
      the air a dome of the size and proportions of the Pantheon. The
      temple of Diana was, however, admired as one of the wonders of
      the world. Successive empires, the Persian, the Macedonian, and
      the Roman, had revered its sanctity and enriched its splendor.
      131 But the rude savages of the Baltic were destitute of a taste
      for the elegant arts, and they despised the ideal terrors of a
      foreign superstition. 132

      128 (return) [ Hist. Aug. p. 178. Jornandes, c. 20.]

      129 (return) [ Strabo, l. xiv. p. 640. Vitruvius, l. i. c. i.
      præfat l vii. Tacit Annal. iii. 61. Plin. Hist. Nat. xxxvi. 14.]

      130 (return) [ The length of St. Peter’s is 840 Roman palms; each
      palm is very little short of nine English inches. See Greaves’s
      Miscellanies vol. i. p. 233; on the Roman Foot. * Note: St.
      Paul’s Cathedral is 500 feet. Dallaway on Architecture—M.]

      131 (return) [ The policy, however, of the Romans induced them to
      abridge the extent of the sanctuary or asylum, which by
      successive privileges had spread itself two stadia round the
      temple. Strabo, l. xiv. p. 641. Tacit. Annal. iii. 60, &c.]

      132 (return) [ They offered no sacrifices to the Grecian gods.
      See Epistol Gregor. Thaumat.]

      Another circumstance is related of these invasions, which might
      deserve our notice, were it not justly to be suspected as the
      fanciful conceit of a recent sophist. We are told that in the
      sack of Athens the Goths had collected all the libraries, and
      were on the point of setting fire to this funeral pile of Grecian
      learning, had not one of their chiefs, of more refined policy
      than his brethren, dissuaded them from the design; by the
      profound observation, that as long as the Greeks were addicted to
      the study of books, they would never apply themselves to the
      exercise of arms. 133 The sagacious counsellor (should the truth
      of the fact be admitted) reasoned like an ignorant barbarian. In
      the most polite and powerful nations, genius of every kind has
      displayed itself about the same period; and the age of science
      has generally been the age of military virtue and success.

      133 (return) [ Zonaras, l. xii. p. 635. Such an anecdote was
      perfectly suited to the taste of Montaigne. He makes use of it in
      his agreeable Essay on Pedantry, l. i. c. 24.]

      IV. The new sovereign of Persia, Artaxerxes and his son Sapor,
      had triumphed (as we have already seen) over the house of
      Arsaces. Of the many princes of that ancient race. Chosroes, king
      of Armenia, had alone preserved both his life and his
      independence. He defended himself by the natural strength of his
      country; by the perpetual resort of fugitives and malecontents;
      by the alliance of the Romans, and above all, by his own courage.

      Invincible in arms, during a thirty years’ war, he was at length
      assassinated by the emissaries of Sapor, king of Persia. The
      patriotic satraps of Armenia, who asserted the freedom and
      dignity of the crown, implored the protection of Rome in favor of
      Tiridates, the lawful heir. But the son of Chosroes was an
      infant, the allies were at a distance, and the Persian monarch
      advanced towards the frontier at the head of an irresistible
      force. Young Tiridates, the future hope of his country, was saved
      by the fidelity of a servant, and Armenia continued above
      twenty-seven years a reluctant province of the great monarchy of
      Persia. 134 Elated with this easy conquest, and presuming on the
      distresses or the degeneracy of the Romans, Sapor obliged the
      strong garrisons of Carrhæ and Nisibis 1341 to surrender, and
      spread devastation and terror on either side of the Euphrates.

      134 (return) [ Moses Chorenensis, l. ii. c. 71, 73, 74. Zonaras,
      l. xii. p. 628. The anthentic relation of the Armenian historian
      serves to rectify the confused account of the Greek. The latter
      talks of the children of Tiridates, who at that time was himself
      an infant. (Compare St Martin Memoires sur l’Armenie, i. p.
      301.—M.)]

      1341 (return) [ Nisibis, according to Persian authors, was taken
      by a miracle, the wall fell, in compliance with the prayers of
      the army. Malcolm’s Persia, l. 76.—M]

      The loss of an important frontier, the ruin of a faithful and
      natural ally, and the rapid success of Sapor’s ambition, affected
      Rome with a deep sense of the insult as well as of the danger.
      Valerian flattered himself, that the vigilance of his lieutenants
      would sufficiently provide for the safety of the Rhine and of the
      Danube; but he resolved, notwithstanding his advanced age, to
      march in person to the defence of the Euphrates.

      During his progress through Asia Minor, the naval enterprises of
      the Goths were suspended, and the afflicted province enjoyed a
      transient and fallacious calm. He passed the Euphrates,
      encountered the Persian monarch near the walls of Edessa, was
      vanquished, and taken prisoner by Sapor. The particulars of this
      great event are darkly and imperfectly represented; yet, by the
      glimmering light which is afforded us, we may discover a long
      series of imprudence, of error, and of deserved misfortunes on
      the side of the Roman emperor. He reposed an implicit confidence
      in Macrianus, his Prætorian præfect. 135 That worthless minister
      rendered his master formidable only to the oppressed subjects,
      and contemptible to the enemies of Rome. 136 By his weak or
      wicked counsels, the Imperial army was betrayed into a situation
      where valor and military skill were equally unavailing. 137 The
      vigorous attempt of the Romans to cut their way through the
      Persian host was repulsed with great slaughter; 138 and Sapor,
      who encompassed the camp with superior numbers, patiently waited
      till the increasing rage of famine and pestilence had insured his
      victory. The licentious murmurs of the legions soon accused
      Valerian as the cause of their calamities; their seditious
      clamors demanded an instant capitulation. An immense sum of gold
      was offered to purchase the permission of a disgraceful retreat.
      But the Persian, conscious of his superiority, refused the money
      with disdain; and detaining the deputies, advanced in order of
      battle to the foot of the Roman rampart, and insisted on a
      personal conference with the emperor. Valerian was reduced to the
      necessity of intrusting his life and dignity to the faith of an
      enemy. The interview ended as it was natural to expect. The
      emperor was made a prisoner, and his astonished troops laid down
      their arms. 139 In such a moment of triumph, the pride and policy
      of Sapor prompted him to fill the vacant throne with a successor
      entirely dependent on his pleasure. Cyriades, an obscure fugitive
      of Antioch, stained with every vice, was chosen to dishonor the
      Roman purple; and the will of the Persian victor could not fail
      of being ratified by the acclamations, however reluctant, of the
      captive army. 140

      135 (return) [ Hist. Aug. p. 191. As Macrianus was an enemy to
      the Christians, they charged him with being a magician.]

      136 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 33.]

      137 (return) [ Hist. Aug. p. 174.]

      138 (return) [ Victor in Cæsar. Eutropius, ix. 7.]

      139 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 33. Zonaras, l. xii. p. 630.
      Peter Patricius, in the Excerpta Legat. p. 29.]

      140 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 185. The reign of Cyriades
      appears in that collection prior to the death of Valerian; but I
      have preferred a probable series of events to the doubtful
      chronology of a most inaccurate writer]

      The Imperial slave was eager to secure the favor of his master by
      an act of treason to his native country. He conducted Sapor over
      the Euphrates, and, by the way of Chalcis, to the metropolis of
      the East. So rapid were the motions of the Persian cavalry, that,
      if we may credit a very judicious historian, 141 the city of
      Antioch was surprised when the idle multitude was fondly gazing
      on the amusements of the theatre. The splendid buildings of
      Antioch, private as well as public, were either pillaged or
      destroyed; and the numerous inhabitants were put to the sword, or
      led away into captivity. 142 The tide of devastation was stopped
      for a moment by the resolution of the high priest of Emesa.
      Arrayed in his sacerdotal robes, he appeared at the head of a
      great body of fanatic peasants, armed only with slings, and
      defended his god and his property from the sacrilegious hands of
      the followers of Zoroaster. 143 But the ruin of Tarsus, and of
      many other cities, furnishes a melancholy proof that, except in
      this singular instance, the conquest of Syria and Cilicia
      scarcely interrupted the progress of the Persian arms. The
      advantages of the narrow passes of Mount Taurus were abandoned,
      in which an invader, whose principal force consisted in his
      cavalry, would have been engaged in a very unequal combat: and
      Sapor was permitted to form the siege of Cæsarea, the capital of
      Cappadocia; a city, though of the second rank, which was supposed
      to contain four hundred thousand inhabitants. Demosthenes
      commanded in the place, not so much by the commission of the
      emperor, as in the voluntary defence of his country. For a long
      time he deferred its fate; and when at last Cæsarea was betrayed
      by the perfidy of a physician, he cut his way through the
      Persians, who had been ordered to exert their utmost diligence to
      take him alive. This heroic chief escaped the power of a foe who
      might either have honored or punished his obstinate valor; but
      many thousands of his fellow-citizens were involved in a general
      massacre, and Sapor is accused of treating his prisoners with
      wanton and unrelenting cruelty. 144 Much should undoubtedly be
      allowed for national animosity, much for humbled pride and
      impotent revenge; yet, upon the whole, it is certain, that the
      same prince, who, in Armenia, had displayed the mild aspect of a
      legislator, showed himself to the Romans under the stern features
      of a conqueror. He despaired of making any permanent
      establishment in the empire, and sought only to leave behind him
      a wasted desert, whilst he transported into Persia the people and
      the treasures of the provinces. 145

      141 (return) [ The sack of Antioch, anticipated by some
      historians, is assigned, by the decisive testimony of Ammianus
      Marcellinus, to the reign of Gallienus, xxiii. 5. * Note: Heyne,
      in his note on Zosimus, contests this opinion of Gibbon and
      observes, that the testimony of Ammianus is in fact by no means
      clear, decisive. Gallienus and Valerian reigned together.
      Zosimus, in a passage, l. iiii. 32, 8, distinctly places this
      event before the capture of Valerian.—M.]

      142 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 35.]

      143 (return) [ John Malala, tom. i. p. 391. He corrupts this
      probable event by some fabulous circumstances.]

      144 (return) [ Zonaras, l. xii. p. 630. Deep valleys were filled
      up with the slain. Crowds of prisoners were driven to water like
      beasts, and many perished for want of food.]

      145 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 25 asserts, that Sapor, had he
      not preferred spoil to conquest, might have remained master of
      Asia.]

      At the time when the East trembled at the name of Sapor, he
      received a present not unworthy of the greatest kings; a long
      train of camels, laden with the most rare and valuable
      merchandises. The rich offering was accompanied with an epistle,
      respectful, but not servile, from Odenathus, one of the noblest
      and most opulent senators of Palmyra. “Who is this Odenathus,”
      (said the haughty victor, and he commanded that the present
      should be cast into the Euphrates,) “that he thus insolently
      presumes to write to his lord? If he entertains a hope of
      mitigating his punishment, let him fall prostrate before the foot
      of our throne, with his hands bound behind his back. Should he
      hesitate, swift destruction shall be poured on his head, on his
      whole race, and on his country.” 146 The desperate extremity to
      which the Palmyrenian was reduced, called into action all the
      latent powers of his soul. He met Sapor; but he met him in arms.

      Infusing his own spirit into a little army collected from the
      villages of Syria 147 and the tents of the desert, 148 he hovered
      round the Persian host, harassed their retreat, carried off part
      of the treasure, and, what was dearer than any treasure, several
      of the women of the great king; who was at last obliged to repass
      the Euphrates with some marks of haste and confusion. 149 By this
      exploit, Odenathus laid the foundations of his future fame and
      fortunes. The majesty of Rome, oppressed by a Persian, was
      protected by a Syrian or Arab of Palmyra.

      146 (return) [ Peter Patricius in Excerpt. Leg. p. 29.]

      147 (return) [ Syrorum agrestium manu. Sextus Rufus, c. 23. Rufus
      Victor the Augustan History, (p. 192,) and several inscriptions,
      agree in making Odenathus a citizen of Palmyra.]

      148 (return) [ He possessed so powerful an interest among the
      wandering tribes, that Procopius (Bell. Persic. l. ii. c. 5) and
      John Malala, (tom. i. p. 391) style him Prince of the Saracens.]

      149 (return) [ Peter Patricius, p. 25.]

      The voice of history, which is often little more than the organ
      of hatred or flattery, reproaches Sapor with a proud abuse of the
      rights of conquest. We are told that Valerian, in chains, but
      invested with the Imperial purple, was exposed to the multitude,
      a constant spectacle of fallen greatness; and that whenever the
      Persian monarch mounted on horseback, he placed his foot on the
      neck of a Roman emperor. Notwithstanding all the remonstrances of
      his allies, who repeatedly advised him to remember the
      vicissitudes of fortune, to dread the returning power of Rome,
      and to make his illustrious captive the pledge of peace, not the
      object of insult, Sapor still remained inflexible. When Valerian
      sunk under the weight of shame and grief, his skin, stuffed with
      straw, and formed into the likeness of a human figure, was
      preserved for ages in the most celebrated temple of Persia; a
      more real monument of triumph, than the fancied trophies of brass
      and marble so often erected by Roman vanity. 150 The tale is
      moral and pathetic, but the truth 1501 of it may very fairly be
      called in question. The letters still extant from the princes of
      the East to Sapor are manifest forgeries; 151 nor is it natural
      to suppose that a jealous monarch should, even in the person of a
      rival, thus publicly degrade the majesty of kings. Whatever
      treatment the unfortunate Valerian might experience in Persia, it
      is at least certain that the only emperor of Rome who had ever
      fallen into the hands of the enemy, languished away his life in
      hopeless captivity.

      150 (return) [ The Pagan writers lament, the Christian insult,
      the misfortunes of Valerian. Their various testimonies are
      accurately collected by Tillemont, tom. iii. p. 739, &c. So
      little has been preserved of eastern history before Mahomet, that
      the modern Persians are totally ignorant of the victory Sapor, an
      event so glorious to their nation. See Bibliotheque Orientale. *
      Note: Malcolm appears to write from Persian authorities, i.
      76.—M.]

      1501 (return) [ Yet Gibbon himself records a speech of the
      emperor Galerius, which alludes to the cruelties exercised
      against the living, and the indignities to which they exposed the
      dead Valerian, vol. ii. ch. 13. Respect for the kingly character
      would by no means prevent an eastern monarch from ratifying his
      pride and his vengeance on a fallen foe.—M.]

      151 (return) [ One of these epistles is from Artavasdes, king of
      Armenia; since Armenia was then a province of Persia, the king,
      the kingdom, and the epistle must be fictitious.]

      The emperor Gallienus, who had long supported with impatience the
      censorial severity of his father and colleague, received the
      intelligence of his misfortunes with secret pleasure and avowed
      indifference. “I knew that my father was a mortal,” said he; “and
      since he has acted as it becomes a brave man, I am satisfied.”
      Whilst Rome lamented the fate of her sovereign, the savage
      coldness of his son was extolled by the servile courtiers as the
      perfect firmness of a hero and a stoic. 152 It is difficult to
      paint the light, the various, the inconstant character of
      Gallienus, which he displayed without constraint, as soon as he
      became sole possessor of the empire. In every art that he
      attempted, his lively genius enabled him to succeed; and as his
      genius was destitute of judgment, he attempted every art, except
      the important ones of war and government. He was a master of
      several curious, but useless sciences, a ready orator, an elegant
      poet, 153 a skilful gardener, an excellent cook, and most
      contemptible prince. When the great emergencies of the state
      required his presence and attention, he was engaged in
      conversation with the philosopher Plotinus, 154 wasting his time
      in trifling or licentious pleasures, preparing his initiation to
      the Grecian mysteries, or soliciting a place in the Areopagus of
      Athens. His profuse magnificence insulted the general poverty;
      the solemn ridicule of his triumphs impressed a deeper sense of
      the public disgrace. 155 The repeated intelligence of invasions,
      defeats, and rebellions, he received with a careless smile; and
      singling out, with affected contempt, some particular production
      of the lost province, he carelessly asked, whether Rome must be
      ruined, unless it was supplied with linen from Egypt, and arras
      cloth from Gaul. There were, however, a few short moments in the
      life of Gallienus, when, exasperated by some recent injury, he
      suddenly appeared the intrepid soldier and the cruel tyrant;
      till, satiated with blood, or fatigued by resistance, he
      insensibly sunk into the natural mildness and indolence of his
      character. 156

      152 (return) [ See his life in the Augustan History.]

      153 (return) [ There is still extant a very pretty Epithalamium,
      composed by Gallienus for the nuptials of his nephews:—“Ite ait,
      O juvenes, pariter sudate medullis Omnibus, inter vos: non
      murmura vestra columbæ, Brachia non hederæ, non vincant oscula
      conchæ.”]

      154 (return) [ He was on the point of giving Plotinus a ruined
      city of Campania to try the experiment of realizing Plato’s
      Republic. See the Life of Plotinus, by Porphyry, in Fabricius’s
      Biblioth. Græc. l. iv.]

      155 (return) [A medal which bears the head of Gallienus has
      perplexed the antiquarians by its legend and reverse; the former
      Gallienæ Augustæ, the latter Ubique Pax. M. Spanheim supposes
      that the coin was struck by some of the enemies of Gallienus, and
      was designed as a severe satire on that effeminate prince. But as
      the use of irony may seem unworthy of the gravity of the Roman
      mint, M. de Vallemont has deduced from a passage of Trebellius
      Pollio (Hist. Aug. p. 198) an ingenious and natural solution.
      Galliena was first cousin to the emperor. By delivering Africa
      from the usurper Celsus, she deserved the title of Augusta. On a
      medal in the French king’s collection, we read a similar
      inscription of Faustina Augusta round the head of Marcus
      Aurelius. With regard to the Ubique Pax, it is easily explained
      by the vanity of Gallienus, who seized, perhaps, the occasion of
      some momentary calm. See Nouvelles de la Republique des Lettres,
      Janvier, 1700, p. 21—34.]

      156 (return) [ This singular character has, I believe, been
      fairly transmitted to us. The reign of his immediate successor
      was short and busy; and the historians who wrote before the
      elevation of the family of Constantine could not have the most
      remote interest to misrepresent the character of Gallienus.]

      At the time when the reins of government were held with so loose
      a hand, it is not surprising that a crowd of usurpers should
      start up in every province of the empire against the son of
      Valerian. It was probably some ingenious fancy, of comparing the
      thirty tyrants of Rome with the thirty tyrants of Athens, that
      induced the writers of the Augustan History to select that
      celebrated number, which has been gradually received into a
      popular appellation. 157 But in every light the parallel is idle
      and defective. What resemblance can we discover between a council
      of thirty persons, the united oppressors of a single city, and an
      uncertain list of independent rivals, who rose and fell in
      irregular succession through the extent of a vast empire? Nor can
      the number of thirty be completed, unless we include in the
      account the women and children who were honored with the Imperial
      title. The reign of Gallienus, distracted as it was, produced
      only nineteen pretenders to the throne: Cyriades, Macrianus,
      Balista, Odenathus, and Zenobia, in the East; in Gaul, and the
      western provinces, Posthumus, Lollianus, Victorinus, and his
      mother Victoria, Marius, and Tetricus; in Illyricum and the
      confines of the Danube, Ingenuus, Regillianus, and Aureolus; in
      Pontus, 158 Saturninus; in Isauria, Trebellianus; Piso in
      Thessaly; Valens in Achaia; Æmilianus in Egypt; and Celsus in
      Africa. 1581 To illustrate the obscure monuments of the life and
      death of each individual, would prove a laborious task, alike
      barren of instruction and of amusement. We may content ourselves
      with investigating some general characters, that most strongly
      mark the condition of the times, and the manners of the men,
      their pretensions, their motives, their fate, and the destructive
      consequences of their usurpation. 159

      157 (return) [ Pollio expresses the most minute anxiety to
      complete the number. * Note: Compare a dissertation of Manso on
      the thirty tyrants at the end of his Leben Constantius des
      Grossen. Breslau, 1817.—M.]

      158 (return) [ The place of his reign is somewhat doubtful; but
      there was a tyrant in Pontus, and we are acquainted with the seat
      of all the others.]

      1581 (return) [ Captain Smyth, in his “Catalogue of Medals,” p.
      307, substitutes two new names to make up the number of nineteen,
      for those of Odenathus and Zenobia. He subjoins this list:—1. 2.
      3. Of those whose coins Those whose coins Those of whom no are
      undoubtedly true. are suspected. coins are known. Posthumus.
      Cyriades. Valens. Lælianus, (Lollianus, G.) Ingenuus. Balista
      Victorinus Celsus. Saturninus. Marius. Piso Frugi. Trebellianus.
      Tetricus. —M. 1815 Macrianus. Quietus. Regalianus (Regillianus,
      G.) Alex. Æmilianus. Aureolus. Sulpicius Antoninus]

      159 (return) [ Tillemont, tom. iii. p. 1163, reckons them
      somewhat differently.]

      It is sufficiently known, that the odious appellation of _Tyrant_
      was often employed by the ancients to express the illegal seizure
      of supreme power, without any reference to the abuse of it.
      Several of the pretenders, who raised the standard of rebellion
      against the emperor Gallienus, were shining models of virtue, and
      almost all possessed a considerable share of vigor and ability.
      Their merit had recommended them to the favor of Valerian, and
      gradually promoted them to the most important commands of the
      empire. The generals, who assumed the title of Augustus, were
      either respected by their troops for their able conduct and
      severe discipline, or admired for valor and success in war, or
      beloved for frankness and generosity. The field of victory was
      often the scene of their election; and even the armorer Marius,
      the most contemptible of all the candidates for the purple, was
      distinguished, however, by intrepid courage, matchless strength,
      and blunt honesty. 160 His mean and recent trade cast, indeed, an
      air of ridicule on his elevation; 1601 but his birth could not be
      more obscure than was that of the greater part of his rivals, who
      were born of peasants, and enlisted in the army as private
      soldiers. In times of confusion every active genius finds the
      place assigned him by nature: in a general state of war military
      merit is the road to glory and to greatness. Of the nineteen
      tyrants Tetricus only was a senator; Piso alone was a noble. The
      blood of Numa, through twenty-eight successive generations, ran
      in the veins of Calphurnius Piso, 161 who, by female alliances,
      claimed a right of exhibiting, in his house, the images of
      Crassus and of the great Pompey. 162 His ancestors had been
      repeatedly dignified with all the honors which the commonwealth
      could bestow; and of all the ancient families of Rome, the
      Calphurnian alone had survived the tyranny of the Cæsars. The
      personal qualities of Piso added new lustre to his race. The
      usurper Valens, by whose order he was killed, confessed, with
      deep remorse, that even an enemy ought to have respected the
      sanctity of Piso; and although he died in arms against Gallienus,
      the senate, with the emperor’s generous permission, decreed the
      triumphal ornaments to the memory of so virtuous a rebel. 163

      160 (return) [ See the speech of Marius in the Augustan History,
      p. 197. The accidental identity of names was the only
      circumstance that could tempt Pollio to imitate Sallust.]

      1601 (return) [ Marius was killed by a soldier, who had formerly
      served as a workman in his shop, and who exclaimed, as he struck,
      “Behold the sword which thyself hast forged.” Trob vita.—G.]

      161 (return) [ “Vos, O Pompilius sanguis!” is Horace’s address to
      the Pisos See Art. Poet. v. 292, with Dacier’s and Sanadon’s
      notes.]

      162 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. xv. 48. Hist. i. 15. In the former
      of these passages we may venture to change paterna into materna.
      In every generation from Augustus to Alexander Severus, one or
      more Pisos appear as consuls. A Piso was deemed worthy of the
      throne by Augustus, (Tacit. Annal. i. 13;) a second headed a
      formidable conspiracy against Nero; and a third was adopted, and
      declared Cæsar, by Galba.]

      163 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 195. The senate, in a moment of
      enthusiasm, seems to have presumed on the approbation of
      Gallienus.]

      The lieutenants of Valerian were grateful to the father, whom
      they esteemed. They disdained to serve the luxurious indolence of
      his unworthy son. The throne of the Roman world was unsupported
      by any principle of loyalty; and treason against such a prince
      might easily be considered as patriotism to the state. Yet if we
      examine with candor the conduct of these usurpers, it will
      appear, that they were much oftener driven into rebellion by
      their fears, than urged to it by their ambition. They dreaded the
      cruel suspicions of Gallienus; they equally dreaded the
      capricious violence of their troops. If the dangerous favor of
      the army had imprudently declared them deserving of the purple,
      they were marked for sure destruction; and even prudence would
      counsel them to secure a short enjoyment of empire, and rather to
      try the fortune of war than to expect the hand of an executioner.

      When the clamor of the soldiers invested the reluctant victims
      with the ensigns of sovereign authority, they sometimes mourned
      in secret their approaching fate. “You have lost,” said
      Saturninus, on the day of his elevation, “you have lost a useful
      commander, and you have made a very wretched emperor.” 164

      164 (return) [ Hist. August p. 196.]

      The apprehensions of Saturninus were justified by the repeated
      experience of revolutions. Of the nineteen tyrants who started up
      under the reign of Gallienus, there was not one who enjoyed a
      life of peace, or a natural death. As soon as they were invested
      with the bloody purple, they inspired their adherents with the
      same fears and ambition which had occasioned their own revolt.
      Encompassed with domestic conspiracy, military sedition, and
      civil war, they trembled on the edge of precipices, in which,
      after a longer or shorter term of anxiety, they were inevitably
      lost. These precarious monarchs received, however, such honors as
      the flattery of their respective armies and provinces could
      bestow; but their claim, founded on rebellion, could never obtain
      the sanction of law or history. Italy, Rome, and the senate,
      constantly adhered to the cause of Gallienus, and he alone was
      considered as the sovereign of the empire. That prince
      condescended, indeed, to acknowledge the victorious arms of
      Odenathus, who deserved the honorable distinction, by the
      respectful conduct which he always maintained towards the son of
      Valerian. With the general applause of the Romans, and the
      consent of Gallienus, the senate conferred the title of Augustus
      on the brave Palmyrenian; and seemed to intrust him with the
      government of the East, which he already possessed, in so
      independent a manner, that, like a private succession, he
      bequeathed it to his illustrious widow, Zenobia. 165

      165 (return) [ The association of the brave Palmyrenian was the
      most popular act of the whole reign of Gallienus. Hist. August.
      p. 180.]

      The rapid and perpetual transitions from the cottage to the
      throne, and from the throne to the grave, might have amused an
      indifferent philosopher; were it possible for a philosopher to
      remain indifferent amidst the general calamities of human kind.
      The election of these precarious emperors, their power and their
      death, were equally destructive to their subjects and adherents.
      The price of their fatal elevation was instantly discharged to
      the troops by an immense donative, drawn from the bowels of the
      exhausted people. However virtuous was their character, however
      pure their intentions, they found themselves reduced to the hard
      necessity of supporting their usurpation by frequent acts of
      rapine and cruelty. When they fell, they involved armies and
      provinces in their fall. There is still extant a most savage
      mandate from Gallienus to one of his ministers, after the
      suppression of Ingenuus, who had assumed the purple in Illyricum.

      “It is not enough,” says that soft but inhuman prince, “that you
      exterminate such as have appeared in arms; the chance of battle
      might have served me as effectually. The male sex of every age
      must be extirpated; provided that, in the execution of the
      children and old men, you can contrive means to save our
      reputation. Let every one die who has dropped an expression, who
      has entertained a thought against me, against _me_, the son of
      Valerian, the father and brother of so many princes. 166 Remember
      that Ingenuus was made emperor: tear, kill, hew in pieces. I
      write to you with my own hand, and would inspire you with my own
      feelings.” 167 Whilst the public forces of the state were
      dissipated in private quarrels, the defenceless provinces lay
      exposed to every invader. The bravest usurpers were compelled, by
      the perplexity of their situation, to conclude ignominious
      treaties with the common enemy, to purchase with oppressive
      tributes the neutrality or services of the Barbarians, and to
      introduce hostile and independent nations into the heart of the
      Roman monarchy. 168

      166 (return) [ Gallienus had given the titles of Cæsar and
      Augustus to his son Saloninus, slain at Cologne by the usurper
      Posthumus. A second son of Gallienus succeeded to the name and
      rank of his elder brother Valerian, the brother of Gallienus, was
      also associated to the empire: several other brothers, sisters,
      nephews, and nieces of the emperor formed a very numerous royal
      family. See Tillemont, tom iii, and M. de Brequigny in the
      Memoires de l’Academie, tom xxxii p. 262.]

      167 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 188.]

      168 (return) [ Regillianus had some bands of Roxolani in his
      service; Posthumus a body of Franks. It was, perhaps, in the
      character of auxiliaries that the latter introduced themselves
      into Spain.]

      Such were the barbarians, and such the tyrants, who, under the
      reigns of Valerian and Gallienus, dismembered the provinces, and
      reduced the empire to the lowest pitch of disgrace and ruin, from
      whence it seemed impossible that it should ever emerge. As far as
      the barrenness of materials would permit, we have attempted to
      trace, with order and perspicuity, the general events of that
      calamitous period. There still remain some particular facts; I.
      The disorders of Sicily; II. The tumults of Alexandria; and, III.
      The rebellion of the Isaurians, which may serve to reflect a
      strong light on the horrid picture.

      I. Whenever numerous troops of banditti, multiplied by success
      and impunity, publicly defy, instead of eluding, the justice of
      their country, we may safely infer that the excessive weakness of
      the country is felt and abused by the lowest ranks of the
      community. The situation of Sicily preserved it from the
      Barbarians; nor could the disarmed province have supported a
      usurper. The sufferings of that once flourishing and still
      fertile island were inflicted by baser hands. A licentious crowd
      of slaves and peasants reigned for a while over the plundered
      country, and renewed the memory of the servile wars of more
      ancient times. 169 Devastations, of which the husbandman was
      either the victim or the accomplice, must have ruined the
      agriculture of Sicily; and as the principal estates were the
      property of the opulent senators of Rome, who often enclosed
      within a farm the territory of an old republic, it is not
      improbable, that this private injury might affect the capital
      more deeply, than all the conquests of the Goths or the Persians.

      169 (return) [ The Augustan History, p. 177. See Diodor. Sicul.
      l. xxxiv.]

      II. The foundation of Alexandria was a noble design, at once
      conceived and executed by the son of Philip. The beautiful and
      regular form of that great city, second only to Rome itself,
      comprehended a circumference of fifteen miles; 170 it was peopled
      by three hundred thousand free inhabitants, besides at least an
      equal number of slaves. 171 The lucrative trade of Arabia and
      India flowed through the port of Alexandria, to the capital and
      provinces of the empire. 1711 Idleness was unknown. Some were
      employed in blowing of glass, others in weaving of linen, others
      again manufacturing the papyrus. Either sex, and every age, was
      engaged in the pursuits of industry, nor did even the blind or
      the lame want occupations suited to their condition. 172 But the
      people of Alexandria, a various mixture of nations, united the
      vanity and inconstancy of the Greeks with the superstition and
      obstinacy of the Egyptians. The most trifling occasion, a
      transient scarcity of flesh or lentils, the neglect of an
      accustomed salutation, a mistake of precedency in the public
      baths, or even a religious dispute, 173 were at any time
      sufficient to kindle a sedition among that vast multitude, whose
      resentments were furious and implacable. 174 After the captivity
      of Valerian and the insolence of his son had relaxed the
      authority of the laws, the Alexandrians abandoned themselves to
      the ungoverned rage of their passions, and their unhappy country
      was the theatre of a civil war, which continued (with a few short
      and suspicious truces) above twelve years. 175 All intercourse
      was cut off between the several quarters of the afflicted city,
      every street was polluted with blood, every building of strength
      converted into a citadel; nor did the tumults subside till a
      considerable part of Alexandria was irretrievably ruined. The
      spacious and magnificent district of Bruchion, 1751 with its
      palaces and musæum, the residence of the kings and philosophers
      of Egypt, is described above a century afterwards, as already
      reduced to its present state of dreary solitude. 176

      170 (return) [ Plin. Hist. Natur. v. 10.]

      171 (return) [ Diodor. Sicul. l. xvii. p. 590, edit. Wesseling.]

      1711 (return) [ Berenice, or Myos-Hormos, on the Red Sea,
      received the eastern commodities. From thence they were
      transported to the Nile, and down the Nile to Alexandria.—M.]

      172 (return) [ See a very curious letter of Hadrian, in the
      Augustan History, p. 245.]

      173 (return) [ Such as the sacrilegious murder of a divine cat.
      See Diodor. Sicul. l. i. * Note: The hostility between the Jewish
      and Grecian part of the population afterwards between the two
      former and the Christian, were unfailing causes of tumult,
      sedition, and massacre. In no place were the religious disputes,
      after the establishment of Christianity, more frequent or more
      sanguinary. See Philo. de Legat. Hist. of Jews, ii. 171, iii.
      111, 198. Gibbon, iii c. xxi. viii. c. xlvii.—M.]

      174 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 195. This long and terrible
      sedition was first occasioned by a dispute between a soldier and
      a townsman about a pair of shoes.]

      175 (return) [ Dionysius apud. Euses. Hist. Eccles. vii. p. 21.
      Ammian xxii. 16.]

      1751 (return) [ The Bruchion was a quarter of Alexandria which
      extended along the largest of the two ports, and contained many
      palaces, inhabited by the Ptolemies. D’Anv. Geogr. Anc. iii.
      10.—G.]

      176 (return) [ Scaliger. Animadver. ad Euseb. Chron. p. 258.
      Three dissertations of M. Bonamy, in the Mem. de l’Academie, tom.
      ix.]

III. The obscure rebellion of Trebellianus, who assumed the purple in
Isauria, a petty province of Asia Minor, was attended with strange and
memorable consequences. The pageant of royalty was soon destroyed by an
officer of Gallienus; but his followers, despairing of mercy, resolved
to shake off their allegiance, not only to the emperor, but to the
empire, and suddenly returned to the savage manners from which they had
never perfectly been reclaimed. Their craggy rocks, a branch of the
wide-extended Taurus, protected their inaccessible retreat. The tillage
of some fertile valleys 177 supplied them with necessaries, and a habit
of rapine with the luxuries of life. In the heart of the Roman
monarchy, the Isaurians long continued a nation of wild barbarians.
Succeeding princes, unable to reduce them to obedience, either by arms
or policy, were compelled to acknowledge their weakness, by surrounding
the hostile and independent spot with a strong chain of fortifications,
178 which often proved insufficient to restrain the incursions of these
domestic foes. The Isaurians, gradually extending their territory to
the sea-coast, subdued the western and mountainous part of Cilicia,
formerly the nest of those daring pirates, against whom the republic
had once been obliged to exert its utmost force, under the conduct of
the great Pompey. 179

      177 (return) [ Strabo, l. xiii. p. 569.]

      178 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 197.]

      179 (return) [ See Cellarius, Geogr Antiq. tom. ii. p. 137, upon
      the limits of Isauria.]

      Our habits of thinking so fondly connect the order of the
      universe with the fate of man, that this gloomy period of history
      has been decorated with inundations, earthquakes, uncommon
      meteors, preternatural darkness, and a crowd of prodigies
      fictitious or exaggerated. 180 But a long and general famine was
      a calamity of a more serious kind. It was the inevitable
      consequence of rapine and oppression, which extirpated the
      produce of the present and the hope of future harvests. Famine is
      almost always followed by epidemical diseases, the effect of
      scanty and unwholesome food. Other causes must, however, have
      contributed to the furious plague, which, from the year two
      hundred and fifty to the year two hundred and sixty-five, raged
      without interruption in every province, every city, and almost
      every family, of the Roman empire. During some time five thousand
      persons died daily in Rome; and many towns, that had escaped the
      hands of the Barbarians, were entirely depopulated. 181b

      180 (return) [ Hist August p 177.]

      181b (return) [ Hist. August. p. 177. Zosimus, l. i. p. 24.
      Zonaras, l. xii. p. 623. Euseb. Chronicon. Victor in Epitom.
      Victor in Cæsar. Eutropius, ix. 5. Orosius, vii. 21.]

      We have the knowledge of a very curious circumstance, of some use
      perhaps in the melancholy calculation of human calamities. An
      exact register was kept at Alexandria of all the citizens
      entitled to receive the distribution of corn. It was found, that
      the ancient number of those comprised between the ages of forty
      and seventy, had been equal to the whole sum of claimants, from
      fourteen to fourscore years of age, who remained alive after the
      reign of Gallienus. 182 Applying this authentic fact to the most
      correct tables of mortality, it evidently proves, that above half
      the people of Alexandria had perished; and could we venture to
      extend the analogy to the other provinces, we might suspect, that
      war, pestilence, and famine, had consumed, in a few years, the
      moiety of the human species. 183

      182 (return) [ Euseb. Hist. Eccles. vii. 21. The fact is taken
      from the Letters of Dionysius, who, in the time of those
      troubles, was bishop of Alexandria.]

      183 (return) [ In a great number of parishes, 11,000 persons were
      found between fourteen and eighty; 5365 between forty and
      seventy. See Buffon, Histoire Naturelle, tom. ii. p. 590.]




      