Chapter LXXI: Prospect Of The Ruins Of Rome In The Fifteenth
      Century.—Part I.

     Prospect Of The Ruins Of Rome In The Fifteenth Century.— Four
     Causes Of Decay And Destruction.—Example Of The
     Coliseum.—Renovation Of The City.—Conclusion Of The Whole Work.

      In the last days of Pope Eugenius the Fourth, 101 two of his
      servants, the learned Poggius 1 and a friend, ascended the
      Capitoline hill; reposed themselves among the ruins of columns
      and temples; and viewed from that commanding spot the wide and
      various prospect of desolation. 2 The place and the object gave
      ample scope for moralizing on the vicissitudes of fortune, which
      spares neither man nor the proudest of his works, which buries
      empires and cities in a common grave; and it was agreed, that in
      proportion to her former greatness, the fall of Rome was the more
      awful and deplorable. “Her primeval state, such as she might
      appear in a remote age, when Evander entertained the stranger of
      Troy, 3 has been delineated by the fancy of Virgil. This Tarpeian
      rock was then a savage and solitary thicket: in the time of the
      poet, it was crowned with the golden roofs of a temple; the
      temple is overthrown, the gold has been pillaged, the wheel of
      fortune has accomplished her revolution, and the sacred ground is
      again disfigured with thorns and brambles. The hill of the
      Capitol, on which we sit, was formerly the head of the Roman
      empire, the citadel of the earth, the terror of kings;
      illustrated by the footsteps of so many triumphs, enriched with
      the spoils and tributes of so many nations. This spectacle of the
      world, how is it fallen! how changed! how defaced! The path of
      victory is obliterated by vines, and the benches of the senators
      are concealed by a dunghill. Cast your eyes on the Palatine hill,
      and seek among the shapeless and enormous fragments the marble
      theatre, the obelisks, the colossal statues, the porticos of
      Nero’s palace: survey the other hills of the city, the vacant
      space is interrupted only by ruins and gardens. The forum of the
      Roman people, where they assembled to enact their laws and elect
      their magistrates, is now enclosed for the cultivation of
      pot-herbs, or thrown open for the reception of swine and
      buffaloes. The public and private edifices, that were founded for
      eternity, lie prostrate, naked, and broken, like the limbs of a
      mighty giant; and the ruin is the more visible, from the
      stupendous relics that have survived the injuries of time and
      fortune.” 4

      101 (return) [ It should be Pope Martin the Fifth. See Gibbon’s
      own note, ch. lxv, note 51 and Hobhouse, Illustrations of Childe
      Harold, p. 155.—M.]

      1 (return) [ I have already (notes 50, 51, on chap. lxv.)
      mentioned the age, character, and writings of Poggius; and
      particularly noticed the date of this elegant moral lecture on
      the varieties of fortune.]

      2 (return) [ Consedimus in ipsis Tarpeiæ arcis ruinis, pone
      ingens portæ cujusdam, ut puto, templi, marmoreum limen,
      plurimasque passim confractas columnas, unde magnâ ex parte
      prospectus urbis patet, (p. 5.)]

      3 (return) [ Æneid viii. 97—369. This ancient picture, so
      artfully introduced, and so exquisitely finished, must have been
      highly interesting to an inhabitant of Rome; and our early
      studies allow us to sympathize in the feelings of a Roman.]

      4 (return) [ Capitolium adeo.... immutatum ut vineæ in senatorum
      subsellia successerint, stercorum ac purgamentorum receptaculum
      factum. Respice ad Palatinum montem..... vasta rudera.... cæteros
      colles perlustra omnia vacua ædificiis, ruinis vineisque oppleta
      conspicies, (Poggius, de Varietat. Fortunæ p. 21.)]

      These relics are minutely described by Poggius, one of the first
      who raised his eyes from the monuments of legendary, to those of
      classic, superstition. 5 _1._Besides a bridge, an arch, a
      sepulchre, and the pyramid of Cestius, he could discern, of the
      age of the republic, a double row of vaults, in the salt-office
      of the Capitol, which were inscribed with the name and
      munificence of Catulus. _2._ Eleven temples were visible in some
      degree, from the perfect form of the Pantheon, to the three
      arches and a marble column of the temple of Peace, which
      Vespasian erected after the civil wars and the Jewish triumph.
      _3._ Of the number, which he rashly defines, of seven _thermæ_,
      or public baths, none were sufficiently entire to represent the
      use and distribution of the several parts: but those of
      Diocletian and Antoninus Caracalla still retained the titles of
      the founders, and astonished the curious spectator, who, in
      observing their solidity and extent, the variety of marbles, the
      size and multitude of the columns, compared the labor and expense
      with the use and importance. Of the baths of Constantine, of
      Alexander, of Domitian, or rather of Titus, some vestige might
      yet be found. _4._ The triumphal arches of Titus, Severus, and
      Constantine, were entire, both the structure and the
      inscriptions; a falling fragment was honored with the name of
      Trajan; and two arches, then extant, in the Flaminian way, have
      been ascribed to the baser memory of Faustina and Gallienus. 501
      _5._ After the wonder of the Coliseum, Poggius might have
      overlooked small amphitheatre of brick, most probably for the use
      of the prætorian camp: the theatres of Marcellus and Pompey were
      occupied in a great measure by public and private buildings; and
      in the Circus, Agonalis and Maximus, little more than the
      situation and the form could be investigated. _6._ The columns of
      Trajan and Antonine were still erect; but the Egyptian obelisks
      were broken or buried. A people of gods and heroes, the
      workmanship of art, was reduced to one equestrian figure of gilt
      brass, and to five marble statues, of which the most conspicuous
      were the two horses of Phidias and Praxiteles. _7._ The two
      mausoleums or sepulchres of Augustus and Hadrian could not
      totally be lost: but the former was only visible as a mound of
      earth; and the latter, the castle of St. Angelo, had acquired the
      name and appearance of a modern fortress. With the addition of
      some separate and nameless columns, such were the remains of the
      ancient city; for the marks of a more recent structure might be
      detected in the walls, which formed a circumference of ten miles,
      included three hundred and seventy-nine turrets, and opened into
      the country by thirteen gates.

      5 (return) [ See Poggius, p. 8—22.]

      501 (return) [ One was in the Via Nomentana; est alter præterea
      Gallieno principi dicatus, ut superscriptio indicat, _Viâ
      Nomentana_. Hobhouse, p. 154. Poggio likewise mentions the
      building which Gibbon ambiguously says be “might have
      overlooked.”—M.]

      This melancholy picture was drawn above nine hundred years after
      the fall of the Western empire, and even of the Gothic kingdom of
      Italy. A long period of distress and anarchy, in which empire,
      and arts, and riches had migrated from the banks of the Tyber,
      was incapable of restoring or adorning the city; and, as all that
      is human must retrograde if it do not advance, every successive
      age must have hastened the ruin of the works of antiquity. To
      measure the progress of decay, and to ascertain, at each æra, the
      state of each edifice, would be an endless and a useless labor;
      and I shall content myself with two observations, which will
      introduce a short inquiry into the general causes and effects.
      _1._ Two hundred years before the eloquent complaint of Poggius,
      an anonymous writer composed a description of Rome. 6 His
      ignorance may repeat the same objects under strange and fabulous
      names. Yet this barbarous topographer had eyes and ears; he could
      observe the visible remains; he could listen to the tradition of
      the people; and he distinctly enumerates seven theatres, eleven
      baths, twelve arches, and eighteen palaces, of which many had
      disappeared before the time of Poggius. It is apparent, that many
      stately monuments of antiquity survived till a late period, 7 and
      that the principles of destruction acted with vigorous and
      increasing energy in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.
      _2._ The same reflection must be applied to the three last ages;
      and we should vainly seek the Septizonium of Severus; 8 which is
      celebrated by Petrarch and the antiquarians of the sixteenth
      century. While the Roman edifices were still entire, the first
      blows, however weighty and impetuous, were resisted by the
      solidity of the mass and the harmony of the parts; but the
      slightest touch would precipitate the fragments of arches and
      columns, that already nodded to their fall.

      6 (return) [ Liber de Mirabilibus Romæ ex Registro Nicolai
      Cardinalis de Arragoniâ in Bibliothecâ St. Isidori Armario IV.,
      No. 69. This treatise, with some short but pertinent notes, has
      been published by Montfaucon, (Diarium Italicum, p. 283—301,) who
      thus delivers his own critical opinion: Scriptor xiiimi. circiter
      sæculi, ut ibidem notatur; antiquariæ rei imperitus et, ut ab
      illo ævo, nugis et anilibus fabellis refertus: sed, quia
      monumenta, quæ iis temporibus Romæ supererant pro modulo
      recenset, non parum inde lucis mutuabitur qui Romanis
      antiquitatibus indagandis operam navabit, (p. 283.)]

      7 (return) [ The Père Mabillon (Analecta, tom. iv. p. 502) has
      published an anonymous pilgrim of the ixth century, who, in his
      visit round the churches and holy places at Rome, touches on
      several buildings, especially porticos, which had disappeared
      before the xiiith century.]

      8 (return) [ On the Septizonium, see the Mémoires sur Pétrarque,
      (tom. i. p. 325,) Donatus, (p. 338,) and Nardini, (p. 117, 414.)]

      After a diligent inquiry, I can discern four principal causes of
      the ruin of Rome, which continued to operate in a period of more
      than a thousand years. I. The injuries of time and nature. II.
      The hostile attacks of the Barbarians and Christians. III. The
      use and abuse of the materials. And, IV. The domestic quarrels of
      the Romans.

      I. The art of man is able to construct monuments far more
      permanent than the narrow span of his own existence; yet these
      monuments, like himself, are perishable and frail; and in the
      boundless annals of time, his life and his labors must equally be
      measured as a fleeting moment. Of a simple and solid edifice, it
      is not easy, however, to circumscribe the duration. As the
      wonders of ancient days, the pyramids 9 attracted the curiosity
      of the ancients: a hundred generations, the leaves of autumn,
      have dropped 10 into the grave; and after the fall of the
      Pharaohs and Ptolemies, the Cæsars and caliphs, the same pyramids
      stand erect and unshaken above the floods of the Nile. A complex
      figure of various and minute parts to more accessible to injury
      and decay; and the silent lapse of time is often accelerated by
      hurricanes and earthquakes, by fires and inundations. The air and
      earth have doubtless been shaken; and the lofty turrets of Rome
      have tottered from their foundations; but the seven hills do not
      appear to be placed on the great cavities of the globe; nor has
      the city, in any age, been exposed to the convulsions of nature,
      which, in the climate of Antioch, Lisbon, or Lima, have crumbled
      in a few moments the works of ages into dust. Fire is the most
      powerful agent of life and death: the rapid mischief may be
      kindled and propagated by the industry or negligence of mankind;
      and every period of the Roman annals is marked by the repetition
      of similar calamities. A memorable conflagration, the guilt or
      misfortune of Nero’s reign, continued, though with unequal fury,
      either six or nine days. 11 Innumerable buildings, crowded in
      close and crooked streets, supplied perpetual fuel for the
      flames; and when they ceased, four only of the fourteen regions
      were left entire; three were totally destroyed, and seven were
      deformed by the relics of smoking and lacerated edifices. 12 In
      the full meridian of empire, the metropolis arose with fresh
      beauty from her ashes; yet the memory of the old deplored their
      irreparable losses, the arts of Greece, the trophies of victory,
      the monuments of primitive or fabulous antiquity. In the days of
      distress and anarchy, every wound is mortal, every fall
      irretrievable; nor can the damage be restored either by the
      public care of government, or the activity of private interest.
      Yet two causes may be alleged, which render the calamity of fire
      more destructive to a flourishing than a decayed city. _1._ The
      more combustible materials of brick, timber, and metals, are
      first melted or consumed; but the flames may play without injury
      or effect on the naked walls, and massy arches, that have been
      despoiled of their ornaments. _2._ It is among the common and
      plebeian habitations, that a mischievous spark is most easily
      blown to a conflagration; but as soon as they are devoured, the
      greater edifices, which have resisted or escaped, are left as so
      many islands in a state of solitude and safety. From her
      situation, Rome is exposed to the danger of frequent inundations.
      Without excepting the Tyber, the rivers that descend from either
      side of the Apennine have a short and irregular course; a shallow
      stream in the summer heats; an impetuous torrent, when it is
      swelled in the spring or winter, by the fall of rain, and the
      melting of the snows. When the current is repelled from the sea
      by adverse winds, when the ordinary bed is inadequate to the
      weight of waters, they rise above the banks, and overspread,
      without limits or control, the plains and cities of the adjacent
      country. Soon after the triumph of the first Punic war, the Tyber
      was increased by unusual rains; and the inundation, surpassing
      all former measure of time and place, destroyed all the buildings
      that were situated below the hills of Rome. According to the
      variety of ground, the same mischief was produced by different
      means; and the edifices were either swept away by the sudden
      impulse, or dissolved and undermined by the long continuance, of
      the flood. 13 Under the reign of Augustus, the same calamity was
      renewed: the lawless river overturned the palaces and temples on
      its banks; 14 and, after the labors of the emperor in cleansing
      and widening the bed that was encumbered with ruins, 15 the
      vigilance of his successors was exercised by similar dangers and
      designs. The project of diverting into new channels the Tyber
      itself, or some of the dependent streams, was long opposed by
      superstition and local interests; 16 nor did the use compensate
      the toil and cost of the tardy and imperfect execution. The
      servitude of rivers is the noblest and most important victory
      which man has obtained over the licentiousness of nature; 17 and
      if such were the ravages of the Tyber under a firm and active
      government, what could oppose, or who can enumerate, the injuries
      of the city, after the fall of the Western empire? A remedy was
      at length produced by the evil itself: the accumulation of
      rubbish and the earth, that has been washed down from the hills,
      is supposed to have elevated the plain of Rome, fourteen or
      fifteen feet, perhaps, above the ancient level; 18 and the modern
      city is less accessible to the attacks of the river. 19

      9 (return) [ The age of the pyramids is remote and unknown, since
      Diodorus Siculus (tom. i l. i. c. 44, p. 72) is unable to decide
      whether they were constructed 1000, or 3400, years before the
      clxxxth Olympiad. Sir John Marsham’s contracted scale of the
      Egyptian dynasties would fix them about 2000 years before Christ,
      (Canon. Chronicus, p. 47.)]

      10 (return) [ See the speech of Glaucus in the Iliad, (Z. 146.)
      This natural but melancholy image is peculiar to Homer.]

      11 (return) [ The learning and criticism of M. des Vignoles
      (Histoire Critique de la République des Lettres, tom. viii. p.
      47—118, ix. p. 172—187) dates the fire of Rome from A.D. 64, July
      19, and the subsequent persecution of the Christians from
      November 15 of the same year.]

      12 (return) [ Quippe in regiones quatuordecim Roma dividitur,
      quarum quatuor integræ manebant, tres solo tenus dejectæ: septem
      reliquis pauca testorum vestigia supererant, lacera et semiusta.
      Among the old relics that were irreparably lost, Tacitus
      enumerates the temple of the moon of Servius Tullius; the fane
      and altar consecrated by Evander præsenti Herculi; the temple of
      Jupiter Stator, a vow of Romulus; the palace of Numa; the temple
      of Vesta cum Penatibus populi Romani. He then deplores the opes
      tot victoriis quæsitæ et Græcarum artium decora.... multa quæ
      seniores meminerant, quæ reparari nequibant, (Annal. xv. 40,
      41.)]

      13 (return) [ A. U. C. 507, repentina subversio ipsius Romæ
      prævenit triumphum Romanorum.... diversæ ignium aquarumque clades
      pene absumsere urbem Nam Tiberis insolitis auctus imbribus et
      ultra opinionem, vel diuturnitate vel maguitudine redundans,
      _omnia_ Romæ ædificia in plano posita delevit. Diversæ qualitates
      locorum ad unam convenere perniciem: quoniam et quæ segnior
      inundatio tenuit madefacta dissolvit, et quæ cursus torrentis
      invenit impulsa dejecit, (Orosius, Hist. l. iv. c. 11, p. 244,
      edit. Havercamp.) Yet we may observe, that it is the plan and
      study of the Christian apologist to magnify the calamities of the
      Pagan world.]

      14 (return) [

      Vidimus flavum Tiberim, retortis Littore Etrusco violenter undis,
      Ire dejectum monumenta Regis Templaque Vestæ. (Horat. Carm. I.
      2.)

      If the palace of Numa and temple of Vesta were thrown down in
      Horace’s time, what was consumed of those buildings by Nero’s
      fire could hardly deserve the epithets of vetustissima or
      incorrupta.]

      15 (return) [ Ad coercendas inundationes alveum Tiberis laxavit,
      ac repurgavit, completum olim ruderibus, et ædificiorum
      prolapsionibus coarctatum, (Suetonius in Augusto, c. 30.)]

      16 (return) [ Tacitus (Annal. i. 79) reports the petitions of the
      different towns of Italy to the senate against the measure; and
      we may applaud the progress of reason. On a similar occasion,
      local interests would undoubtedly be consulted: but an English
      House of Commons would reject with contempt the arguments of
      superstition, “that nature had assigned to the rivers their
      proper course,” &c.]

      17 (return) [ See the Epoques de la Nature of the eloquent and
      philosophic Buffon. His picture of Guyana, in South America, is
      that of a new and savage land, in which the waters are abandoned
      to themselves without being regulated by human industry, (p. 212,
      561, quarto edition.)]

      18 (return) [ In his travels in Italy, Mr. Addison (his works,
      vol. ii. p. 98, Baskerville’s edition) has observed this curious
      and unquestionable fact.]

      19 (return) [ Yet in modern times, the Tyber has sometimes
      damaged the city, and in the years 1530, 1557, 1598, the annals
      of Muratori record three mischievous and memorable inundations,
      (tom. xiv. p. 268, 429, tom. xv. p. 99, &c.) * Note: The level of
      the Tyber was at one time supposed to be considerably raised:
      recent investigations seem to be conclusive against this
      supposition. See a brief, but satisfactory statement of the
      question in Bunsen and Platner, Roms Beschreibung. vol. i. p.
      29.—M.]

      II. The crowd of writers of every nation, who impute the
      destruction of the Roman monuments to the Goths and the
      Christians, have neglected to inquire how far they were animated
      by a hostile principle, and how far they possessed the means and
      the leisure to satiate their enmity. In the preceding volumes of
      this History, I have described the triumph of barbarism and
      religion; and I can only resume, in a few words, their real or
      imaginary connection with the ruin of ancient Rome. Our fancy may
      create, or adopt, a pleasing romance, that the Goths and Vandals
      sallied from Scandinavia, ardent to avenge the flight of Odin; 20
      to break the chains, and to chastise the oppressors, of mankind;
      that they wished to burn the records of classic literature, and
      to found their national architecture on the broken members of the
      Tuscan and Corinthian orders. But in simple truth, the northern
      conquerors were neither sufficiently savage, nor sufficiently
      refined, to entertain such aspiring ideas of destruction and
      revenge. The shepherds of Scythia and Germany had been educated
      in the armies of the empire, whose discipline they acquired, and
      whose weakness they invaded: with the familiar use of the Latin
      tongue, they had learned to reverence the name and titles of
      Rome; and, though incapable of emulating, they were more inclined
      to admire, than to abolish, the arts and studies of a brighter
      period. In the transient possession of a rich and unresisting
      capital, the soldiers of Alaric and Genseric were stimulated by
      the passions of a victorious army; amidst the wanton indulgence
      of lust or cruelty, portable wealth was the object of their
      search; nor could they derive either pride or pleasure from the
      unprofitable reflection, that they had battered to the ground the
      works of the consuls and Cæsars. Their moments were indeed
      precious; the Goths evacuated Rome on the sixth, 21 the Vandals
      on the fifteenth, day: 22 and, though it be far more difficult to
      build than to destroy, their hasty assault would have made a
      slight impression on the solid piles of antiquity. We may
      remember, that both Alaric and Genseric affected to spare the
      buildings of the city; that they subsisted in strength and beauty
      under the auspicious government of Theodoric; 23 and that the
      momentary resentment of Totila 24 was disarmed by his own temper
      and the advice of his friends and enemies. From these innocent
      Barbarians, the reproach may be transferred to the Catholics of
      Rome. The statues, altars, and houses, of the dæmons, were an
      abomination in their eyes; and in the absolute command of the
      city, they might labor with zeal and perseverance to erase the
      idolatry of their ancestors. The demolition of the temples in the
      East 25 affords to _them_ an example of conduct, and to _us_ an
      argument of belief; and it is probable that a portion of guilt or
      merit may be imputed with justice to the Roman proselytes. Yet
      their abhorrence was confined to the monuments of heathen
      superstition; and the civil structures that were dedicated to the
      business or pleasure of society might be preserved without injury
      or scandal. The change of religion was accomplished, not by a
      popular tumult, but by the decrees of the emperors, of the
      senate, and of time. Of the Christian hierarchy, the bishops of
      Rome were commonly the most prudent and least fanatic; nor can
      any positive charge be opposed to the meritorious act of saving
      or converting the majestic structure of the Pantheon. 26 261

      20 (return) [ I take this opportunity of declaring, that in the
      course of twelve years, I have forgotten, or renounced, the
      flight of Odin from Azoph to Sweden, which I never very seriously
      believed, (vol. i. p. 283.) The Goths are apparently Germans: but
      all beyond Cæsar and Tacitus is darkness or fable, in the
      antiquities of Germany.]

      21 (return) [ History of the Decline, &c., vol. iii. p. 291.]

      22 (return) [———————————vol. iii. p. 464.]

      23 (return) [———————————vol. iv. p. 23—25.]

      24 (return) [———————————vol. iv. p. 258.]

      25 (return) [———————————vol. iii. c. xxviii. p. 139—148.]

      26 (return) [ Eodem tempore petiit a Phocate principe templum,
      quod appellatur _Pantheon_, in quo fecit ecclesiam Sanctæ Mariæ
      semper Virginis, et omnium martyrum; in quâ ecclesiæ princeps
      multa bona obtulit, (Anastasius vel potius Liber Pontificalis in
      Bonifacio IV., in Muratori, Script. Rerum Italicarum, tom. iii.
      P. i. p. 135.) According to the anonymous writer in Montfaucon,
      the Pantheon had been vowed by Agrippa to Cybele and Neptune, and
      was dedicated by Boniface IV., on the calends of November, to the
      Virgin, quæ est mater omnium sanctorum, (p. 297, 298.)]

      261 (return) [ The popes, under the dominion of the emperor and
      of the exarchs, according to Feas’s just observation, did not
      possess the power of disposing of the buildings and monuments of
      the city according to their own will. Bunsen and Platner, vol. i.
      p. 241.—M.]

      III. The value of any object that supplies the wants or pleasures
      of mankind is compounded of its substance and its form, of the
      materials and the manufacture. Its price must depend on the
      number of persons by whom it may be acquired and used; on the
      extent of the market; and consequently on the ease or difficulty
      of remote exportation, according to the nature of the commodity,
      its local situation, and the temporary circumstances of the
      world. The Barbarian conquerors of Rome usurped in a moment the
      toil and treasure of successive ages; but, except the luxuries of
      immediate consumption, they must view without desire all that
      could not be removed from the city in the Gothic wagons or the
      fleet of the Vandals. 27 Gold and silver were the first objects
      of their avarice; as in every country, and in the smallest
      compass, they represent the most ample command of the industry
      and possessions of mankind. A vase or a statue of those precious
      metals might tempt the vanity of some Barbarian chief; but the
      grosser multitude, regardless of the form, was tenacious only of
      the substance; and the melted ingots might be readily divided and
      stamped into the current coin of the empire. The less active or
      less fortunate robbers were reduced to the baser plunder of
      brass, lead, iron, and copper: whatever had escaped the Goths and
      Vandals was pillaged by the Greek tyrants; and the emperor
      Constans, in his rapacious visit, stripped the bronze tiles from
      the roof of the Pantheon. 28 The edifices of Rome might be
      considered as a vast and various mine; the first labor of
      extracting the materials was already performed; the metals were
      purified and cast; the marbles were hewn and polished; and after
      foreign and domestic rapine had been satiated, the remains of the
      city, could a purchaser have been found, were still venal. The
      monuments of antiquity had been left naked of their precious
      ornaments; but the Romans would demolish with their own hands the
      arches and walls, if the hope of profit could surpass the cost of
      the labor and exportation. If Charlemagne had fixed in Italy the
      seat of the Western empire, his genius would have aspired to
      restore, rather than to violate, the works of the Cæsars; but
      policy confined the French monarch to the forests of Germany; his
      taste could be gratified only by destruction; and the new palace
      of Aix la Chapelle was decorated with the marbles of Ravenna 29
      and Rome. 30 Five hundred years after Charlemagne, a king of
      Sicily, Robert, the wisest and most liberal sovereign of the age,
      was supplied with the same materials by the easy navigation of
      the Tyber and the sea; and Petrarch sighs an indignant complaint,
      that the ancient capital of the world should adorn from her own
      bowels the slothful luxury of Naples. 31 But these examples of
      plunder or purchase were rare in the darker ages; and the Romans,
      alone and unenvied, might have applied to their private or public
      use the remaining structures of antiquity, if in their present
      form and situation they had not been useless in a great measure
      to the city and its inhabitants. The walls still described the
      old circumference, but the city had descended from the seven
      hills into the Campus Martius; and some of the noblest monuments
      which had braved the injuries of time were left in a desert, far
      remote from the habitations of mankind. The palaces of the
      senators were no longer adapted to the manners or fortunes of
      their indigent successors: the use of baths 32 and porticos was
      forgotten: in the sixth century, the games of the theatre,
      amphitheatre, and circus, had been interrupted: some temples were
      devoted to the prevailing worship; but the Christian churches
      preferred the holy figure of the cross; and fashion, or reason,
      had distributed after a peculiar model the cells and offices of
      the cloister. Under the ecclesiastical reign, the number of these
      pious foundations was enormously multiplied; and the city was
      crowded with forty monasteries of men, twenty of women, and sixty
      chapters and colleges of canons and priests, 33 who aggravated,
      instead of relieving, the depopulation of the tenth century. But
      if the forms of ancient architecture were disregarded by a people
      insensible of their use and beauty, the plentiful materials were
      applied to every call of necessity or superstition; till the
      fairest columns of the Ionic and Corinthian orders, the richest
      marbles of Paros and Numidia, were degraded, perhaps to the
      support of a convent or a stable. The daily havoc which is
      perpetrated by the Turks in the cities of Greece and Asia may
      afford a melancholy example; and in the gradual destruction of
      the monuments of Rome, Sixtus the Fifth may alone be excused for
      employing the stones of the Septizonium in the glorious edifice
      of St. Peter’s. 34 A fragment, a ruin, howsoever mangled or
      profaned, may be viewed with pleasure and regret; but the greater
      part of the marble was deprived of substance, as well as of place
      and proportion; it was burnt to lime for the purpose of cement.
      341 Since the arrival of Poggius, the temple of Concord, 35 and
      many capital structures, had vanished from his eyes; and an
      epigram of the same age expresses a just and pious fear, that the
      continuance of this practice would finally annihilate all the
      monuments of antiquity. 36 The smallness of their numbers was the
      sole check on the demands and depredations of the Romans. The
      imagination of Petrarch might create the presence of a mighty
      people; 37 and I hesitate to believe, that, even in the
      fourteenth century, they could be reduced to a contemptible list
      of thirty-three thousand inhabitants. From that period to the
      reign of Leo the Tenth, if they multiplied to the amount of
      eighty-five thousand, 38 the increase of citizens was in some
      degree pernicious to the ancient city.

      27 (return) [ Flaminius Vacca (apud Montfaucon, p. 155, 156. His
      memoir is likewise printed, p. 21, at the end of the Roman Antica
      of Nardini) and several Romans, doctrinâ graves, were persuaded
      that the Goths buried their treasures at Rome, and bequeathed the
      secret marks filiis nepotibusque. He relates some anecdotes to
      prove, that in his own time, these places were visited and rifled
      by the Transalpine pilgrims, the heirs of the Gothic conquerors.]

      28 (return) [ Omnia quæ erant in ære ad ornatum civitatis
      deposuit, sed e ecclesiam B. Mariæ ad martyres quæ de tegulis
      æreis cooperta discooperuit, (Anast. in Vitalian. p. 141.) The
      base and sacrilegious Greek had not even the poor pretence of
      plundering a heathen temple, the Pantheon was already a Catholic
      church.]

      29 (return) [ For the spoils of Ravenna (musiva atque marmora)
      see the original grant of Pope Adrian I. to Charlemagne, (Codex
      Carolin. epist. lxvii. in Muratori, Script. Ital. tom. iii. P.
      ii. p. 223.)]

      30 (return) [ I shall quote the authentic testimony of the Saxon
      poet, (A.D. 887—899,) de Rebus gestis Caroli magni, l. v.
      437—440, in the Historians of France, (tom. v. p. 180:)

               Ad quæ marmoreas præstabat Roma columnas, Quasdam
               præcipuas pulchra Ravenna dedit. De tam longinquâ
               poterit regione vetustas Illius ornatum, Francia, ferre
               tibi.

      And I shall add from the Chronicle of Sigebert, (Historians of
      France, tom. v. p. 378,) extruxit etiam Aquisgrani basilicam
      plurimæ pulchritudinis, ad cujus structuram a Roma et Ravenna
      columnas et marmora devehi fecit.]

      31 (return) [ I cannot refuse to transcribe a long passage of
      Petrarch (Opp. p. 536, 537) in Epistolâ hortatoriâ ad Nicolaum
      Laurentium; it is so strong and full to the point: Nec pudor aut
      pietas continuit quominus impii spoliata Dei templa, occupatas
      arces, opes publicas, regiones urbis, atque honores magistratûum
      inter se divisos; (_habeant?_) quam unâ in re, turbulenti ac
      seditiosi homines et totius reliquæ vitæ consiliis et rationibus
      discordes, inhumani fderis stupendà societate convenirent, in
      pontes et mnia atque immeritos lapides desævirent. Denique post
      vi vel senio collapsa palatia, quæ quondam ingentes tenuerunt
      viri, post diruptos arcus triumphales, (unde majores horum
      forsitan corruerunt,) de ipsius vetustatis ac propriæ impietatis
      fragminibus vilem quæstum turpi mercimonio captare non puduit.
      Itaque nunc, heu dolor! heu scelus indignum! de vestris marmoreis
      columnis, de liminibus templorum, (ad quæ nuper ex orbe toto
      concursus devotissimus fiebat,) de imaginibus sepulchrorum sub
      quibus patrum vestrorum venerabilis civis (_cinis?_) erat, ut
      reliquas sileam, desidiosa Neapolis adornatur. Sic paullatim
      ruinæ ipsæ deficiunt. Yet King Robert was the friend of
      Petrarch.]

      32 (return) [ Yet Charlemagne washed and swam at Aix la Chapelle
      with a hundred of his courtiers, (Eginhart, c. 22, p. 108, 109,)
      and Muratori describes, as late as the year 814, the public baths
      which were built at Spoleto in Italy, (Annali, tom. vi. p. 416.)]

      33 (return) [ See the Annals of Italy, A.D. 988. For this and the
      preceding fact, Muratori himself is indebted to the Benedictine
      history of Père Mabillon.]

      34 (return) [ Vita di Sisto Quinto, da Gregorio Leti, tom. iii.
      p. 50.]

      341 (return) [ From the quotations in Bunsen’s Dissertation, it
      may be suspected that this slow but continual process of
      destruction was the most fatal. Ancient Rome eas considered a
      quarry from which the church, the castle of the baron, or even
      the hovel of the peasant, might be repaired.—M.]

      35 (return) [ Porticus ædis Concordiæ, quam cum primum ad urbem
      accessi vidi fere integram opere marmoreo admodum specioso:
      Romani postmodum ad calcem ædem totam et porticûs partem
      disjectis columnis sunt demoliti, (p. 12.) The temple of Concord
      was therefore _not_ destroyed by a sedition in the xiiith
      century, as I have read in a MS. treatise del’ Governo civile di
      Rome, lent me formerly at Rome, and ascribed (I believe falsely)
      to the celebrated Gravina. Poggius likewise affirms that the
      sepulchre of Cæcilia Metella was burnt for lime, (p. 19, 20.)]

      36 (return) [ Composed by Æneas Sylvius, afterwards Pope Pius
      II., and published by Mabillon, from a MS. of the queen of
      Sweden, (Musæum Italicum, tom. i. p. 97.)

               Oblectat me, Roma, tuas spectare ruinas: Ex cujus lapsû
               gloria prisca patet. Sed tuus hic populus muris defossa
               vetustis Calcis in obsequium marmora dura coquit. Impia
               tercentum si sic gens egerit annos Nullum hinc indicium
               nobilitatis erit.]

      37 (return) [ Vagabamur pariter in illâ urbe tam magnâ; quæ, cum
      propter spatium vacua videretur, populum habet immensum, (Opp p.
      605 Epist. Familiares, ii. 14.)]

      38 (return) [ These states of the population of Rome at different
      periods are derived from an ingenious treatise of the physician
      Lancisi, de Romani Cli Qualitatibus, (p. 122.)]

      IV. I have reserved for the last, the most potent and forcible
      cause of destruction, the domestic hostilities of the Romans
      themselves. Under the dominion of the Greek and French emperors,
      the peace of the city was disturbed by accidental, though
      frequent, seditions: it is from the decline of the latter, from
      the beginning of the tenth century, that we may date the
      licentiousness of private war, which violated with impunity the
      laws of the Code and the Gospel, without respecting the majesty
      of the absent sovereign, or the presence and person of the vicar
      of Christ. In a dark period of five hundred years, Rome was
      perpetually afflicted by the sanguinary quarrels of the nobles
      and the people, the Guelphs and Ghibelines, the Colonna and
      Ursini; and if much has escaped the knowledge, and much is
      unworthy of the notice, of history, I have exposed in the two
      preceding chapters the causes and effects of the public
      disorders. At such a time, when every quarrel was decided by the
      sword, and none could trust their lives or properties to the
      impotence of law, the powerful citizens were armed for safety, or
      offence, against the domestic enemies whom they feared or hated.
      Except Venice alone, the same dangers and designs were common to
      all the free republics of Italy; and the nobles usurped the
      prerogative of fortifying their houses, and erecting strong
      towers, 39 that were capable of resisting a sudden attack. The
      cities were filled with these hostile edifices; and the example
      of Lucca, which contained three hundred towers; her law, which
      confined their height to the measure of fourscore feet, may be
      extended with suitable latitude to the more opulent and populous
      states. The first step of the senator Brancaleone in the
      establishment of peace and justice, was to demolish (as we have
      already seen) one hundred and forty of the towers of Rome; and,
      in the last days of anarchy and discord, as late as the reign of
      Martin the Fifth, forty-four still stood in one of the thirteen
      or fourteen regions of the city. To this mischievous purpose the
      remains of antiquity were most readily adapted: the temples and
      arches afforded a broad and solid basis for the new structures of
      brick and stone; and we can name the modern turrets that were
      raised on the triumphal monuments of Julius Cæsar, Titus, and the
      Antonines. 40 With some slight alterations, a theatre, an
      amphitheatre, a mausoleum, was transformed into a strong and
      spacious citadel. I need not repeat, that the mole of Adrian has
      assumed the title and form of the castle of St. Angelo; 41 the
      Septizonium of Severus was capable of standing against a royal
      army; 42 the sepulchre of Metella has sunk under its outworks; 43
      431 the theatres of Pompey and Marcellus were occupied by the
      Savelli and Ursini families; 44 and the rough fortress has been
      gradually softened to the splendor and elegance of an Italian
      palace. Even the churches were encompassed with arms and
      bulwarks, and the military engines on the roof of St. Peter’s
      were the terror of the Vatican and the scandal of the Christian
      world. Whatever is fortified will be attacked; and whatever is
      attacked may be destroyed. Could the Romans have wrested from the
      popes the castle of St. Angelo, they had resolved by a public
      decree to annihilate that monument of servitude. Every building
      of defence was exposed to a siege; and in every siege the arts
      and engines of destruction were laboriously employed. After the
      death of Nicholas the Fourth, Rome, without a sovereign or a
      senate, was abandoned six months to the fury of civil war. “The
      houses,” says a cardinal and poet of the times, 45 “were crushed
      by the weight and velocity of enormous stones; 46 the walls were
      perforated by the strokes of the battering-ram; the towers were
      involved in fire and smoke; and the assailants were stimulated by
      rapine and revenge.” The work was consummated by the tyranny of
      the laws; and the factions of Italy alternately exercised a blind
      and thoughtless vengeance on their adversaries, whose houses and
      castles they razed to the ground. 47 In comparing the _days_ of
      foreign, with the _ages_ of domestic, hostility, we must
      pronounce, that the latter have been far more ruinous to the
      city; and our opinion is confirmed by the evidence of Petrarch.
      “Behold,” says the laureate, “the relics of Rome, the image of
      her pristine greatness! neither time nor the Barbarian can boast
      the merit of this stupendous destruction: it was perpetrated by
      her own citizens, by the most illustrious of her sons; and your
      ancestors (he writes to a noble Annabaldi) have done with the
      battering-ram what the Punic hero could not accomplish with the
      sword.” 48 The influence of the two last principles of decay must
      in some degree be multiplied by each other; since the houses and
      towers, which were subverted by civil war, required by a new and
      perpetual supply from the monuments of antiquity. 481

      39 (return) [ All the facts that relate to the towers at Rome,
      and in other free cities of Italy, may be found in the laborious
      and entertaining compilation of Muratori, Antiquitates Italiæ
      Medii Ævi, dissertat. xxvi., (tom. ii. p. 493—496, of the Latin,
      tom.. p. 446, of the Italian work.)]

      40 (return) [ As for instance, templum Jani nunc dicitur, turris
      Centii Frangipanis; et sane Jano impositæ turris lateritiæ
      conspicua hodieque vestigia supersunt, (Montfaucon Diarium
      Italicum, p. 186.) The anonymous writer (p. 285) enumerates,
      arcus Titi, turris Cartularia; arcus Julii Cæsaris et Senatorum,
      turres de Bratis; arcus Antonini, turris de Cosectis, &c.]

      41 (return) [ Hadriani molem.... magna ex parte Romanorum
      injuria.... disturbavit; quod certe funditus evertissent, si
      eorum manibus pervia, absumptis grandibus saxis, reliqua moles
      exstisset, (Poggius de Varietate Fortunæ, p. 12.)]

      42 (return) [ Against the emperor Henry IV., (Muratori, Annali d’
      Italia, tom. ix. p. 147.)]

      43 (return) [ I must copy an important passage of Montfaucon:
      Turris ingens rotunda.... Cæciliæ Metellæ.... sepulchrum erat,
      cujus muri tam solidi, ut spatium perquam minimum intus vacuum
      supersit; et _Torre di Bove_ dicitur, a boum capitibus muro
      inscriptis. Huic sequiori ævo, tempore intestinorum bellorum, ceu
      urbecula adjuncta fuit, cujus mnia et turres etiamnum visuntur;
      ita ut sepulchrum Metellæ quasi arx oppiduli fuerit. Ferventibus
      in urbe partibus, cum Ursini atque Columnenses mutuis cladibus
      perniciem inferrent civitati, in utriusve partis ditionem cederet
      magni momenti erat, (p. 142.)]

      431 (return) [ This is inaccurately expressed. The sepulchre is
      still standing See Hobhouse, p. 204.—M.]

      44 (return) [ See the testimonies of Donatus, Nardini, and
      Montfaucon. In the Savelli palace, the remains of the theatre of
      Marcellus are still great and conspicuous.]

      45 (return) [ James, cardinal of St. George, ad velum aureum, in
      his metrical life of Pope Celestin V., (Muratori, Script. Ital.
      tom. i. P. iii. p. 621, l. i. c. l. ver. 132, &c.)

               Hoc dixisse sat est, Romam caruisee Senatû Mensibus
               exactis heu sex; belloque vocatum (_vocatos_) In scelus,
               in socios fraternaque vulnera patres; Tormentis jecisse
               viros immania saxa; Perfodisse domus trabibus, fecisse
               ruinas Ignibus; incensas turres, obscuraque fumo Lumina
               vicino, quo sit spoliata supellex.]

      46 (return) [ Muratori (Dissertazione sopra le Antiquità
      Italiane, tom. i. p. 427—431) finds that stone bullets of two or
      three hundred pounds’ weight were not uncommon; and they are
      sometimes computed at xii. or xviii _cantari_ of Genoa, each
      _cantaro_ weighing 150 pounds.]

      47 (return) [ The vith law of the Visconti prohibits this common
      and mischievous practice; and strictly enjoins, that the houses
      of banished citizens should be preserved pro communi utilitate,
      (Gualvancus de la Flamma in Muratori, Script. Rerum Italicarum,
      tom. xii. p. 1041.)]

      48 (return) [ Petrarch thus addresses his friend, who, with shame
      and tears had shown him the mnia, laceræ specimen miserable Romæ,
      and declared his own intention of restoring them, (Carmina
      Latina, l. ii. epist. Paulo Annibalensi, xii. p. 97, 98.)

               Nec te parva manet servatis fama ruinis Quanta quod
               integræ fuit olim gloria Romæ Reliquiæ testantur adhuc;
               quas longior ætas Frangere non valuit; non vis aut ira
               cruenti Hostis, ab egregiis franguntur civibus, heu!
               heu’ ————Quod _ille_ nequivit (_Hannibal_.) Perficit hic
               aries.]

      481 (return) [ Bunsen has shown that the hostile attacks of the
      emperor Henry the Fourth, but more particularly that of Robert
      Guiscard, who burned down whole districts, inflicted the worst
      damage on the ancient city Vol. i. p. 247.—M.]




      Chapter LXXI: Prospect Of The Ruins Of Rome In The Fifteenth
      Century.—Part II

      These general observations may be separately applied to the
      amphitheatre of Titus, which has obtained the name of the
      Coliseum, 49 either from its magnitude, or from Nero’s colossal
      statue; an edifice, had it been left to time and nature, which
      might perhaps have claimed an eternal duration. The curious
      antiquaries, who have computed the numbers and seats, are
      disposed to believe, that above the upper row of stone steps the
      amphitheatre was encircled and elevated with several stages of
      wooden galleries, which were repeatedly consumed by fire, and
      restored by the emperors. Whatever was precious, or portable, or
      profane, the statues of gods and heroes, and the costly ornaments
      of sculpture which were cast in brass, or overspread with leaves
      of silver and gold, became the first prey of conquest or
      fanaticism, of the avarice of the Barbarians or the Christians.
      In the massy stones of the Coliseum, many holes are discerned;
      and the two most probable conjectures represent the various
      accidents of its decay. These stones were connected by solid
      links of brass or iron, nor had the eye of rapine overlooked the
      value of the baser metals; 50 the vacant space was converted into
      a fair or market; the artisans of the Coliseum are mentioned in
      an ancient survey; and the chasms were perforated or enlarged to
      receive the poles that supported the shops or tents of the
      mechanic trades. 51 Reduced to its naked majesty, the Flavian
      amphitheatre was contemplated with awe and admiration by the
      pilgrims of the North; and their rude enthusiasm broke forth in a
      sublime proverbial expression, which is recorded in the eighth
      century, in the fragments of the venerable Bede: “As long as the
      Coliseum stands, Rome shall stand; when the Coliseum falls, Rome
      will fall; when Rome falls, the world will fall.” 52 In the
      modern system of war, a situation commanded by three hills would
      not be chosen for a fortress; but the strength of the walls and
      arches could resist the engines of assault; a numerous garrison
      might be lodged in the enclosure; and while one faction occupied
      the Vatican and the Capitol, the other was intrenched in the
      Lateran and the Coliseum. 53

      49 (return) [ The fourth part of the Verona Illustrata of the
      marquis Maffei professedly treats of amphitheatres, particularly
      those of Rome and Verona, of their dimensions, wooden galleries,
      &c. It is from magnitude that he derives the name of _Colosseum_,
      or _Coliseum_; since the same appellation was applied to the
      amphitheatre of Capua, without the aid of a colossal statue;
      since that of Nero was erected in the court (_in atrio_) of his
      palace, and not in the Coliseum, (P. iv. p. 15—19, l. i. c. 4.)]

      50 (return) [ Joseph Maria Suarés, a learned bishop, and the
      author of a history of Præneste, has composed a separate
      dissertation on the seven or eight probable causes of these
      holes, which has been since reprinted in the Roman Thesaurus of
      Sallengre. Montfaucon (Diarium, p. 233) pronounces the rapine of
      the Barbarians to be the unam germanamque causam foraminum. *
      Note: The improbability of this theory is shown by Bunsen, vol.
      i. p. 239.—M.]

      51 (return) [ Donatus, Roma Vetus et Nova, p. 285. Note: Gibbon
      has followed Donatus, who supposes that a silk manufactory was
      established in the xiith century in the Coliseum. The Bandonarii,
      or Bandererii, were the officers who carried the standards of
      their _school_ before the pope. Hobhouse, p. 269.—M.]

      52 (return) [ Quamdiu stabit Colyseus, stabit et Roma; quando
      cadet Coly seus, cadet Roma; quando cadet Roma, cadet et mundus,
      (Beda in Excerptis seu Collectaneis apud Ducange Glossar. Med. et
      Infimæ Latinitatis, tom. ii. p. 407, edit. Basil.) This saying
      must be ascribed to the Anglo-Saxon pilgrims who visited Rome
      before the year 735 the æra of Bede’s death; for I do not believe
      that our venerable monk ever passed the sea.]

      53 (return) [ I cannot recover, in Muratori’s original Lives of
      the Popes, (Script Rerum Italicarum, tom. iii. P. i.,) the
      passage that attests this hostile partition, which must be
      applied to the end of the xiith or the beginning of the xiith
      century. * Note: “The division is mentioned in Vit. Innocent.
      Pap. II. ex Cardinale Aragonio, (Script. Rer. Ital. vol. iii. P.
      i. p. 435,) and Gibbon might have found frequent other records of
      it at other dates.” Hobhouse’s Illustrations of Childe Harold. p.
      130.—M.]

      The abolition at Rome of the ancient games must be understood
      with some latitude; and the carnival sports, of the Testacean
      mount and the Circus Agonalis, 54 were regulated by the law 55 or
      custom of the city. The senator presided with dignity and pomp to
      adjudge and distribute the prizes, the gold ring, or the
      _pallium_, 56 as it was styled, of cloth or silk. A tribute on
      the Jews supplied the annual expense; 57 and the races, on foot,
      on horseback, or in chariots, were ennobled by a tilt and
      tournament of seventy-two of the Roman youth. In the year one
      thousand three hundred and thirty-two, a bull-feast, after the
      fashion of the Moors and Spaniards, was celebrated in the
      Coliseum itself; and the living manners are painted in a diary of
      the times. 58 A convenient order of benches was restored; and a
      general proclamation, as far as Rimini and Ravenna, invited the
      nobles to exercise their skill and courage in this perilous
      adventure. The Roman ladies were marshalled in three squadrons,
      and seated in three balconies, which, on this day, the third of
      September, were lined with scarlet cloth. The fair Jacova di
      Rovere led the matrons from beyond the Tyber, a pure and native
      race, who still represent the features and character of
      antiquity. The remainder of the city was divided as usual between
      the Colonna and Ursini: the two factions were proud of the number
      and beauty of their female bands: the charms of Savella Ursini
      are mentioned with praise; and the Colonna regretted the absence
      of the youngest of their house, who had sprained her ankle in the
      garden of Nero’s tower. The lots of the champions were drawn by
      an old and respectable citizen; and they descended into the
      arena, or pit, to encounter the wild bulls, on foot as it should
      seem, with a single spear. Amidst the crowd, our annalist has
      selected the names, colors, and devices, of twenty of the most
      conspicuous knights. Several of the names are the most
      illustrious of Rome and the ecclesiastical state: Malatesta,
      Polenta, della Valle, Cafarello, Savelli, Capoccio, Conti,
      Annibaldi, Altieri, Corsi: the colors were adapted to their taste
      and situation; the devices are expressive of hope or despair, and
      breathe the spirit of gallantry and arms. “I am alone, like the
      youngest of the Horatii,” the confidence of an intrepid stranger:
      “I live disconsolate,” a weeping widower: “I burn under the
      ashes,” a discreet lover: “I adore Lavinia, or Lucretia,” the
      ambiguous declaration of a modern passion: “My faith is as pure,”
      the motto of a white livery: “Who is stronger than myself?” of a
      lion’s hide: “If am drowned in blood, what a pleasant death!” the
      wish of ferocious courage. The pride or prudence of the Ursini
      restrained them from the field, which was occupied by three of
      their hereditary rivals, whose inscriptions denoted the lofty
      greatness of the Colonna name: “Though sad, I am strong:” “Strong
      as I am great:” “If I fall,” addressing himself to the
      spectators, “you fall with me;”—intimating (says the contemporary
      writer) that while the other families were the subjects of the
      Vatican, they alone were the supporters of the Capitol. The
      combats of the amphitheatre were dangerous and bloody. Every
      champion successively encountered a wild bull; and the victory
      may be ascribed to the quadrupeds, since no more than eleven were
      left on the field, with the loss of nine wounded and eighteen
      killed on the side of their adversaries. Some of the noblest
      families might mourn, but the pomp of the funerals, in the
      churches of St. John Lateran and St. Maria Maggiore, afforded a
      second holiday to the people. Doubtless it was not in such
      conflicts that the blood of the Romans should have been shed;
      yet, in blaming their rashness, we are compelled to applaud their
      gallantry; and the noble volunteers, who display their
      magnificence, and risk their lives, under the balconies of the
      fair, excite a more generous sympathy than the thousands of
      captives and malefactors who were reluctantly dragged to the
      scene of slaughter. 59

      54 (return) [ Although the structure of the circus Agonalis be
      destroyed, it still retains its form and name, (Agona, Nagona,
      Navona;) and the interior space affords a sufficient level for
      the purpose of racing. But the Monte Testaceo, that strange pile
      of broken pottery, seems only adapted for the annual practice of
      hurling from top to bottom some wagon-loads of live hogs for the
      diversion of the populace, (Statuta Urbis Romæ, p. 186.)]

      55 (return) [ See the Statuta Urbis Romæ, l. iii. c. 87, 88, 89,
      p. 185, 186. I have already given an idea of this municipal code.
      The races of Nagona and Monte Testaceo are likewise mentioned in
      the Diary of Peter Antonius from 1404 to 1417, (Muratori, Script.
      Rerum Italicarum, tom. xxiv. p. 1124.)]

      56 (return) [ The _Pallium_, which Menage so foolishly derives
      from _Palmarius_, is an easy extension of the idea and the words,
      from the robe or cloak, to the materials, and from thence to
      their application as a prize, (Muratori, dissert. xxxiii.)]

      57 (return) [ For these expenses, the Jews of Rome paid each year
      1130 florins, of which the odd thirty represented the pieces of
      silver for which Judas had betrayed his Master to their
      ancestors. There was a foot-race of Jewish as well as of
      Christian youths, (Statuta Urbis, ibidem.)]

      58 (return) [ This extraordinary bull-feast in the Coliseum is
      described, from tradition rather than memory, by Ludovico
      Buonconte Monaldesco, on the most ancient fragments of Roman
      annals, (Muratori, Script Rerum Italicarum, tom. xii. p. 535,
      536;) and however fanciful they may seem, they are deeply marked
      with the colors of truth and nature.]

      59 (return) [ Muratori has given a separate dissertation (the
      xxixth) to the games of the Italians in the Middle Ages.]

      This use of the amphitheatre was a rare, perhaps a singular,
      festival: the demand for the materials was a daily and continual
      want which the citizens could gratify without restraint or
      remorse. In the fourteenth century, a scandalous act of concord
      secured to both factions the privilege of extracting stones from
      the free and common quarry of the Coliseum; 60 and Poggius
      laments, that the greater part of these stones had been burnt to
      lime by the folly of the Romans. 61 To check this abuse, and to
      prevent the nocturnal crimes that might be perpetrated in the
      vast and gloomy recess, Eugenius the Fourth surrounded it with a
      wall; and, by a charter long extant, granted both the ground and
      edifice to the monks of an adjacent convent. 62 After his death,
      the wall was overthrown in a tumult of the people; and had they
      themselves respected the noblest monument of their fathers, they
      might have justified the resolve that it should never be degraded
      to private property. The inside was damaged: but in the middle of
      the sixteenth century, an æra of taste and learning, the exterior
      circumference of one thousand six hundred and twelve feet was
      still entire and inviolate; a triple elevation of fourscore
      arches, which rose to the height of one hundred and eight feet.
      Of the present ruin, the nephews of Paul the Third are the guilty
      agents; and every traveller who views the Farnese palace may
      curse the sacrilege and luxury of these upstart princes. 63 A
      similar reproach is applied to the Barberini; and the repetition
      of injury might be dreaded from every reign, till the Coliseum
      was placed under the safeguard of religion by the most liberal of
      the pontiffs, Benedict the Fourteenth, who consecrated a spot
      which persecution and fable had stained with the blood of so many
      Christian martyrs. 64

      60 (return) [ In a concise but instructive memoir, the abbé
      Barthelemy (Mémoires de l’Académie des Inscriptions, tom. xxviii.
      p. 585) has mentioned this agreement of the factions of the xivth
      century de Tiburtino faciendo in the Coliseum, from an original
      act in the archives of Rome.]

      61 (return) [ Coliseum.... ob stultitiam Romanorum _majori ex
      parte_ ad calcem deletum, says the indignant Poggius, (p. 17:)
      but his expression too strong for the present age, must be very
      tenderly applied to the xvth century.]

      62 (return) [ Of the Olivetan monks. Montfaucon (p. 142) affirms
      this fact from the memorials of Flaminius Vacca, (No. 72.) They
      still hoped on some future occasion, to revive and vindicate
      their grant.]

      63 (return) [ After measuring the priscus amphitheatri gyrus,
      Montfaucon (p. 142) only adds that it was entire under Paul III.;
      tacendo clamat. Muratori (Annali d’Italia, tom. xiv. p. 371) more
      freely reports the guilt of the Farnese pope, and the indignation
      of the Roman people. Against the nephews of Urban VIII. I have no
      other evidence than the vulgar saying, “Quod non fecerunt
      Barbari, fecere Barberini,” which was perhaps suggested by the
      resemblance of the words.]

      64 (return) [ As an antiquarian and a priest, Montfaucon thus
      deprecates the ruin of the Coliseum: Quòd si non suopte merito
      atque pulchritudine dignum fuisset quod improbas arceret manus,
      indigna res utique in locum tot martyrum cruore sacrum tantopere
      sævitum esse.]

      When Petrarch first gratified his eyes with a view of those
      monuments, whose scattered fragments so far surpass the most
      eloquent descriptions, he was astonished at the supine
      indifference 65 of the Romans themselves; 66 he was humbled
      rather than elated by the discovery, that, except his friend
      Rienzi, and one of the Colonna, a stranger of the Rhône was more
      conversant with these antiquities than the nobles and natives of
      the metropolis. 67 The ignorance and credulity of the Romans are
      elaborately displayed in the old survey of the city which was
      composed about the beginning of the thirteenth century; and,
      without dwelling on the manifold errors of name and place, the
      legend of the Capitol 68 may provoke a smile of contempt and
      indignation. “The Capitol,” says the anonymous writer, “is so
      named as being the head of the world; where the consuls and
      senators formerly resided for the government of the city and the
      globe. The strong and lofty walls were covered with glass and
      gold, and crowned with a roof of the richest and most curious
      carving. Below the citadel stood a palace, of gold for the
      greatest part, decorated with precious stones, and whose value
      might be esteemed at one third of the world itself. The statues
      of all the provinces were arranged in order, each with a small
      bell suspended from its neck; and such was the contrivance of art
      magic, 69 that if the province rebelled against Rome, the statue
      turned round to that quarter of the heavens, the bell rang, the
      prophet of the Capitol repeated the prodigy, and the senate was
      admonished of the impending danger.” A second example, of less
      importance, though of equal absurdity, may be drawn from the two
      marble horses, led by two naked youths, who have since been
      transported from the baths of Constantine to the Quirinal hill.
      The groundless application of the names of Phidias and Praxiteles
      may perhaps be excused; but these Grecian sculptors should not
      have been removed above four hundred years from the age of
      Pericles to that of Tiberius; they should not have been
      transferred into two philosophers or magicians, whose nakedness
      was the symbol of truth or knowledge, who revealed to the emperor
      his most secret actions; and, after refusing all pecuniary
      recompense, solicited the honor of leaving this eternal monument
      of themselves. 70 Thus awake to the power of magic, the Romans
      were insensible to the beauties of art: no more than five statues
      were visible to the eyes of Poggius; and of the multitudes which
      chance or design had buried under the ruins, the resurrection was
      fortunately delayed till a safer and more enlightened age. 71 The
      Nile which now adorns the Vatican, had been explored by some
      laborers in digging a vineyard near the temple, or convent, of
      the Minerva; but the impatient proprietor, who was tormented by
      some visits of curiosity, restored the unprofitable marble to its
      former grave. 72 The discovery of a statue of Pompey, ten feet in
      length, was the occasion of a lawsuit. It had been found under a
      partition wall: the equitable judge had pronounced, that the head
      should be separated from the body to satisfy the claims of the
      contiguous owners; and the sentence would have been executed, if
      the intercession of a cardinal, and the liberality of a pope, had
      not rescued the Roman hero from the hands of his barbarous
      countrymen. 73

      65 (return) [ Yet the statutes of Rome (l. iii. c. 81, p. 182)
      impose a fine of 500 _aurei_ on whosoever shall demolish any
      ancient edifice, ne ruinis civitas deformetur, et ut antiqua
      ædificia decorem urbis perpetuo representent.]

      66 (return) [ In his first visit to Rome (A.D. 1337. See Mémoires
      sur Pétrarque, tom. i. p. 322, &c.) Petrarch is struck mute
      miraculo rerum tantarum, et stuporis mole obrutus.... Præsentia
      vero, mirum dictû nihil imminuit: vere major fuit Roma majoresque
      sunt reliquiæ quam rebar. Jam non orbem ab hâc urbe domitum, sed
      tam sero domitum, miror, (Opp. p. 605, Familiares, ii. 14, Joanni
      Columnæ.)]

      67 (return) [ He excepts and praises the _rare_ knowledge of John
      Colonna. Qui enim hodie magis ignari rerum Romanarum, quam Romani
      cives! Invitus dico, nusquam minus Roma cognoscitur quam Romæ.]

      68 (return) [ After the description of the Capitol, he adds,
      statuæ erant quot sunt mundi provinciæ; et habebat quælibet
      tintinnabulum ad collum. Et erant ita per magicam artem
      dispositæ, ut quando aliqua regio Romano Imperio rebellis erat,
      statim imago illius provinciæ vertebat se contra illam; unde
      tintinnabulum resonabat quod pendebat ad collum; tuncque vates
      Capitolii qui erant custodes senatui, &c. He mentions an example
      of the Saxons and Suevi, who, after they had been subdued by
      Agrippa, again rebelled: tintinnabulum sonuit; sacerdos qui erat
      in speculo in hebdomada senatoribus nuntiavit: Agrippa marched
      back and reduced the—Persians, (Anonym. in Montfaucon, p. 297,
      298.)]

      69 (return) [ The same writer affirms, that Virgil captus a
      Romanis invisibiliter exiit, ivitque Neapolim. A Roman magician,
      in the xith century, is introduced by William of Malmsbury, (de
      Gestis Regum Anglorum, l. ii. p. 86;) and in the time of
      Flaminius Vacca (No. 81, 103) it was the vulgar belief that the
      strangers (the _Goths_) invoked the dæmons for the discovery of
      hidden treasures.]

      70 (return) [ Anonym. p. 289. Montfaucon (p. 191) justly
      observes, that if Alexander be represented, these statues cannot
      be the work of Phidias (Olympiad lxxxiii.) or Praxiteles,
      (Olympiad civ.,) who lived before that conqueror (Plin. Hist.
      Natur. xxxiv. 19.)]

      71 (return) [ William of Malmsbury (l. ii. p. 86, 87) relates a
      marvellous discovery (A.D. 1046) of Pallas the son of Evander,
      who had been slain by Turnus; the perpetual light in his
      sepulchre, a Latin epitaph, the corpse, yet entire, of a young
      giant, the enormous wound in his breast, (pectus perforat
      ingens,) &c. If this fable rests on the slightest foundation, we
      may pity the bodies, as well as the statues, that were exposed to
      the air in a barbarous age.]

      72 (return) [ Prope porticum Minervæ, statua est recubantis,
      cujus caput integrâ effigie tantæ magnitudinis, ut signa omnia
      excedat. Quidam ad plantandas arbores scrobes faciens detexit. Ad
      hoc visendum cum plures in dies magis concurrerent, strepitum
      adeuentium fastidiumque pertæsus, horti patronus congestâ humo
      texit, (Poggius de Varietate Fortunæ, p. 12.)]

      73 (return) [ See the Memorials of Flaminius Vacca, No. 57, p.
      11, 12, at the end of the Roma Antica of Nardini, (1704, in
      4to.)]

      But the clouds of barbarism were gradually dispelled; and the
      peaceful authority of Martin the Fifth and his successors
      restored the ornaments of the city as well as the order of the
      ecclesiastical state. The improvements of Rome, since the
      fifteenth century, have not been the spontaneous produce of
      freedom and industry. The first and most natural root of a great
      city is the labor and populousness of the adjacent country, which
      supplies the materials of subsistence, of manufactures, and of
      foreign trade. But the greater part of the Campagna of Rome is
      reduced to a dreary and desolate wilderness: the overgrown
      estates of the princes and the clergy are cultivated by the lazy
      hands of indigent and hopeless vassals; and the scanty harvests
      are confined or exported for the benefit of a monopoly. A second
      and more artificial cause of the growth of a metropolis is the
      residence of a monarch, the expense of a luxurious court, and the
      tributes of dependent provinces. Those provinces and tributes had
      been lost in the fall of the empire; and if some streams of the
      silver of Peru and the gold of Brazil have been attracted by the
      Vatican, the revenues of the cardinals, the fees of office, the
      oblations of pilgrims and clients, and the remnant of
      ecclesiastical taxes, afford a poor and precarious supply, which
      maintains, however, the idleness of the court and city. The
      population of Rome, far below the measure of the great capitals
      of Europe, does not exceed one hundred and seventy thousand
      inhabitants; 74 and within the spacious enclosure of the walls,
      the largest portion of the seven hills is overspread with
      vineyards and ruins. The beauty and splendor of the modern city
      may be ascribed to the abuses of the government, to the influence
      of superstition. Each reign (the exceptions are rare) has been
      marked by the rapid elevation of a new family, enriched by the
      childish pontiff at the expense of the church and country. The
      palaces of these fortunate nephews are the most costly monuments
      of elegance and servitude: the perfect arts of architecture,
      sculpture, and painting, have been prostituted in their service;
      and their galleries and gardens are decorated with the most
      precious works of antiquity, which taste or vanity has prompted
      them to collect. The ecclesiastical revenues were more decently
      employed by the popes themselves in the pomp of the Catholic
      worship; but it is superfluous to enumerate their pious
      foundations of altars, chapels, and churches, since these lesser
      stars are eclipsed by the sun of the Vatican, by the dome of St.
      Peter, the most glorious structure that ever has been applied to
      the use of religion. The fame of Julius the Second, Leo the
      Tenth, and Sixtus the Fifth, is accompanied by the superior merit
      of Bramante and Fontana, of Raphael and Michael Angelo; and the
      same munificence which had been displayed in palaces and temples
      was directed with equal zeal to revive and emulate the labors of
      antiquity. Prostrate obelisks were raised from the ground, and
      erected in the most conspicuous places; of the eleven aqueducts
      of the Cæsars and consuls, three were restored; the artificial
      rivers were conducted over a long series of old, or of new
      arches, to discharge into marble basins a flood of salubrious and
      refreshing waters: and the spectator, impatient to ascend the
      steps of St. Peter’s, is detained by a column of Egyptian
      granite, which rises between two lofty and perpetual fountains,
      to the height of one hundred and twenty feet. The map, the
      description, the monuments of ancient Rome, have been elucidated
      by the diligence of the antiquarian and the student: 75 and the
      footsteps of heroes, the relics, not of superstition, but of
      empire, are devoutly visited by a new race of pilgrims from the
      remote, and once savage countries of the North.

      74 (return) [ In the year 1709, the inhabitants of Rome (without
      including eight or ten thousand Jews,) amounted to 138,568 souls,
      (Labat Voyages en Espagne et en Italie, tom. iii. p. 217, 218.)
      In 1740, they had increased to 146,080; and in 1765, I left them,
      without the Jews 161,899. I am ignorant whether they have since
      continued in a progressive state.]

      75 (return) [ The Père Montfaucon distributes his own
      observations into twenty days; he should have styled them weeks,
      or months, of his visits to the different parts of the city,
      (Diarium Italicum, c. 8—20, p. 104—301.) That learned Benedictine
      reviews the topographers of ancient Rome; the first efforts of
      Blondus, Fulvius, Martianus, and Faunus, the superior labors of
      Pyrrhus Ligorius, had his learning been equal to his labors; the
      writings of Onuphrius Panvinius, qui omnes obscuravit, and the
      recent but imperfect books of Donatus and Nardini. Yet Montfaucon
      still sighs for a more complete plan and description of the old
      city, which must be attained by the three following methods: 1.
      The measurement of the space and intervals of the ruins. 2. The
      study of inscriptions, and the places where they were found. 3.
      The investigation of all the acts, charters, diaries of the
      middle ages, which name any spot or building of Rome. The
      laborious work, such as Montfaucon desired, must be promoted by
      princely or public munificence: but the great modern plan of
      Nolli (A.D. 1748) would furnish a solid and accurate basis for
      the ancient topography of Rome.]

      Of these pilgrims, and of every reader, the attention will be
      excited by a History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire;
      the greatest, perhaps, and most awful scene in the history of
      mankind. The various causes and progressive effects are connected
      with many of the events most interesting in human annals: the
      artful policy of the Cæsars, who long maintained the name and
      image of a free republic; the disorders of military despotism;
      the rise, establishment, and sects of Christianity; the
      foundation of Constantinople; the division of the monarchy; the
      invasion and settlements of the Barbarians of Germany and
      Scythia; the institutions of the civil law; the character and
      religion of Mahomet; the temporal sovereignty of the popes; the
      restoration and decay of the Western empire of Charlemagne; the
      crusades of the Latins in the East: the conquests of the Saracens
      and Turks; the ruin of the Greek empire; the state and
      revolutions of Rome in the middle age. The historian may applaud
      the importance and variety of his subject; but while he is
      conscious of his own imperfections, he must often accuse the
      deficiency of his materials. It was among the ruins of the
      Capitol that I first conceived the idea of a work which has
      amused and exercised near twenty years of my life, and which,
      however inadequate to my own wishes, I finally delivere to the
      curiosity and candor of the public.

      Lausanne, June 27 1787




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DECLINE AND FALL OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE  ***

***** This file should be named 25717-0.txt or 25717-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
    https://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/7/1/25717/

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


