Chapter LXX: Final Settlement Of The Ecclesiastical State.—Part
      I.

     Character And Coronation Of Petrarch.—Restoration Of The Freedom
     And Government Of Rome By The Tribune Rienzi.—His Virtues And
     Vices, His Expulsion And Death.—Return Of The Popes From
     Avignon.—Great Schism Of The West.—Reunion Of The Latin
     Church.—Last Struggles Of Roman Liberty.— Statutes Of Rome.—Final
     Settlement Of The Ecclesiastical State.

      In the apprehension of modern times, Petrarch 1 is the Italian
      songster of Laura and love. In the harmony of his Tuscan rhymes,
      Italy applauds, or rather adores, the father of her lyric poetry;
      and his verse, or at least his name, is repeated by the
      enthusiasm, or affectation, of amorous sensibility. Whatever may
      be the private taste of a stranger, his slight and superficial
      knowledge should humbly acquiesce in the judgment of a learned
      nation; yet I may hope or presume, that the Italians do not
      compare the tedious uniformity of sonnets and elegies with the
      sublime compositions of their epic muse, the original wildness of
      Dante, the regular beauties of Tasso, and the boundless variety
      of the incomparable Ariosto. The merits of the lover I am still
      less qualified to appreciate: nor am I deeply interested in a
      metaphysical passion for a nymph so shadowy, that her existence
      has been questioned; 2 for a matron so prolific, 3 that she was
      delivered of eleven legitimate children, 4 while her amorous
      swain sighed and sung at the fountain of Vaucluse. 5 But in the
      eyes of Petrarch, and those of his graver contemporaries, his
      love was a sin, and Italian verse a frivolous amusement. His
      Latin works of philosophy, poetry, and eloquence, established his
      serious reputation, which was soon diffused from Avignon over
      France and Italy: his friends and disciples were multiplied in
      every city; and if the ponderous volume of his writings 6 be now
      abandoned to a long repose, our gratitude must applaud the man,
      who by precept and example revived the spirit and study of the
      Augustan age. From his earliest youth, Petrarch aspired to the
      poetic crown. The academical honors of the three faculties had
      introduced a royal degree of master or doctor in the art of
      poetry; 7 and the title of poet-laureate, which custom, rather
      than vanity, perpetuates in the English court, 8 was first
      invented by the Cæsars of Germany. In the musical games of
      antiquity, a prize was bestowed on the victor: 9 the belief that
      Virgil and Horace had been crowned in the Capitol inflamed the
      emulation of a Latin bard; 10 and the laurel 11 was endeared to
      the lover by a verbal resemblance with the name of his mistress.
      The value of either object was enhanced by the difficulties of
      the pursuit; and if the virtue or prudence of Laura was
      inexorable, 12 he enjoyed, and might boast of enjoying, the nymph
      of poetry. His vanity was not of the most delicate kind, since he
      applauds the success of his own _labors_; his name was popular;
      his friends were active; the open or secret opposition of envy
      and prejudice was surmounted by the dexterity of patient merit.
      In the thirty-sixth year of his age, he was solicited to accept
      the object of his wishes; and on the same day, in the solitude of
      Vaucluse, he received a similar and solemn invitation from the
      senate of Rome and the university of Paris. The learning of a
      theological school, and the ignorance of a lawless city, were
      alike unqualified to bestow the ideal though immortal wreath
      which genius may obtain from the free applause of the public and
      of posterity: but the candidate dismissed this troublesome
      reflection; and after some moments of complacency and suspense,
      preferred the summons of the metropolis of the world.

      1 (return) [ The Mémoires sur la Vie de François Pétrarque,
      (Amsterdam, 1764, 1767, 3 vols. in 4to.,) form a copious,
      original, and entertaining work, a labor of love, composed from
      the accurate study of Petrarch and his contemporaries; but the
      hero is too often lost in the general history of the age, and the
      author too often languishes in the affectation of politeness and
      gallantry. In the preface to his first volume, he enumerates and
      weighs twenty Italian biographers, who have professedly treated
      of the same subject.]

      2 (return) [ The allegorical interpretation prevailed in the xvth
      century; but the wise commentators were not agreed whether they
      should understand by Laura, religion, or virtue, or the blessed
      virgin, or————. See the prefaces to the first and second volume.]

      3 (return) [ Laure de Noves, born about the year 1307, was
      married in January 1325, to Hugues de Sade, a noble citizen of
      Avignon, whose jealousy was not the effect of love, since he
      married a second wife within seven months of her death, which
      happened the 6th of April, 1348, precisely one-and-twenty years
      after Petrarch had seen and loved her.]

      4 (return) [ Corpus crebris partubus exhaustum: from one of these
      is issued, in the tenth degree, the abbé de Sade, the fond and
      grateful biographer of Petrarch; and this domestic motive most
      probably suggested the idea of his work, and urged him to inquire
      into every circumstance that could affect the history and
      character of his grandmother, (see particularly tom. i. p.
      122—133, notes, p. 7—58, tom. ii. p. 455—495 not. p. 76—82.)]

      5 (return) [ Vaucluse, so familiar to our English travellers, is
      described from the writings of Petrarch, and the local knowledge
      of his biographer, (Mémoires, tom. i. p. 340—359.) It was, in
      truth, the retreat of a hermit; and the moderns are much
      mistaken, if they place Laura and a happy lover in the grotto.]

      6 (return) [ Of 1250 pages, in a close print, at Basil in the
      xvith century, but without the date of the year. The abbé de Sade
      calls aloud for a new edition of Petrarch’s Latin works; but I
      much doubt whether it would redound to the profit of the
      bookseller, or the amusement of the public.]

      7 (return) [ Consult Selden’s Titles of Honor, in his works,
      (vol. iii. p. 457—466.) A hundred years before Petrarch, St.
      Francis received the visit of a poet, qui ab imperatore fuerat
      coronatus et exinde rex versuum dictus.]

      8 (return) [ From Augustus to Louis, the muse has too often been
      false and venal: but I much doubt whether any age or court can
      produce a similar establishment of a stipendiary poet, who in
      every reign, and at all events, is bound to furnish twice a year
      a measure of praise and verse, such as may be sung in the chapel,
      and, I believe, in the presence, of the sovereign. I speak the
      more freely, as the best time for abolishing this ridiculous
      custom is while the prince is a man of virtue and the poet a man
      of genius.]

      9 (return) [ Isocrates (in Panegyrico, tom. i. p. 116, 117, edit.
      Battie, Cantab. 1729) claims for his native Athens the glory of
      first instituting and recommending the alwnaV—kai ta aqla
      megista—mh monon tacouV kai rwmhV, alla kai logwn kai gnwmhV. The
      example of the Panathenæa was imitated at Delphi; but the Olympic
      games were ignorant of a musical crown, till it was extorted by
      the vain tyranny of Nero, (Sueton. in Nerone, c. 23; Philostrat.
      apud Casaubon ad locum; Dion Cassius, or Xiphilin, l. lxiii. p.
      1032, 1041. Potter’s Greek Antiquities, vol. i. p. 445, 450.)]

      10 (return) [ The Capitoline games (certamen quinquenale,
      _musicum_, equestre, gymnicum) were instituted by Domitian
      (Sueton. c. 4) in the year of Christ 86, (Censorin. de Die
      Natali, c. 18, p. 100, edit. Havercamp.) and were not abolished
      in the ivth century, (Ausonius de Professoribus Burdegal. V.) If
      the crown were given to superior merit, the exclusion of Statius
      (Capitolia nostræ inficiata lyræ, Sylv. l. iii. v. 31) may do
      honor to the games of the Capitol; but the Latin poets who lived
      before Domitian were crowned only in the public opinion.]

      11 (return) [ Petrarch and the senators of Rome were ignorant
      that the laurel was not the Capitoline, but the Delphic crown,
      (Plin. Hist. Natur p. 39. Hist. Critique de la République des
      Lettres, tom. i. p. 150—220.) The victors in the Capitol were
      crowned with a garland of oak eaves, (Martial, l. iv. epigram
      54.)]

      12 (return) [ The pious grandson of Laura has labored, and not
      without success, to vindicate her immaculate chastity against the
      censures of the grave and the sneers of the profane, (tom. ii.
      notes, p. 76—82.)]

      The ceremony of his coronation 13 was performed in the Capitol,
      by his friend and patron the supreme magistrate of the republic.
      Twelve patrician youths were arrayed in scarlet; six
      representatives of the most illustrious families, in green robes,
      with garlands of flowers, accompanied the procession; in the
      midst of the princes and nobles, the senator, count of
      Anguillara, a kinsman of the Colonna, assumed his throne; and at
      the voice of a herald Petrarch arose. After discoursing on a text
      of Virgil, and thrice repeating his vows for the prosperity of
      Rome, he knelt before the throne, and received from the senator a
      laurel crown, with a more precious declaration, “This is the
      reward of merit.” The people shouted, “Long life to the Capitol
      and the poet!” A sonnet in praise of Rome was accepted as the
      effusion of genius and gratitude; and after the whole procession
      had visited the Vatican, the profane wreath was suspended before
      the shrine of St. Peter. In the act or diploma 14 which was
      presented to Petrarch, the title and prerogatives of
      poet-laureate are revived in the Capitol, after the lapse of
      thirteen hundred years; and he receives the perpetual privilege
      of wearing, at his choice, a crown of laurel, ivy, or myrtle, of
      assuming the poetic habit, and of teaching, disputing,
      interpreting, and composing, in all places whatsoever, and on all
      subjects of literature. The grant was ratified by the authority
      of the senate and people; and the character of citizen was the
      recompense of his affection for the Roman name. They did him
      honor, but they did him justice. In the familiar society of
      Cicero and Livy, he had imbibed the ideas of an ancient patriot;
      and his ardent fancy kindled every idea to a sentiment, and every
      sentiment to a passion. The aspect of the seven hills and their
      majestic ruins confirmed these lively impressions; and he loved a
      country by whose liberal spirit he had been crowned and adopted.
      The poverty and debasement of Rome excited the indignation and
      pity of her grateful son; he dissembled the faults of his
      fellow-citizens; applauded with partial fondness the last of
      their heroes and matrons; and in the remembrance of the past, in
      the hopes of the future, was pleased to forget the miseries of
      the present time. Rome was still the lawful mistress of the
      world: the pope and the emperor, the bishop and general, had
      abdicated their station by an inglorious retreat to the Rhône and
      the Danube; but if she could resume her virtue, the republic
      might again vindicate her liberty and dominion. Amidst the
      indulgence of enthusiasm and eloquence, 15 Petrarch, Italy, and
      Europe, were astonished by a revolution which realized for a
      moment his most splendid visions. The rise and fall of the
      tribune Rienzi will occupy the following pages: 16 the subject is
      interesting, the materials are rich, and the glance of a patriot
      bard 17 will sometimes vivify the copious, but simple, narrative
      of the Florentine, 18 and more especially of the Roman,
      historian. 19

      13 (return) [ The whole process of Petrarch’s coronation is
      accurately described by the abbé de Sade, (tom. i. p. 425—435,
      tom. ii. p. 1—6, notes, p. 1—13,) from his own writings, and the
      Roman diary of Ludovico, Monaldeschi, without mixing in this
      authentic narrative the more recent fables of Sannuccio Delbene.]

      14 (return) [ The original act is printed among the Pieces
      Justificatives in the Mémoires sur Pétrarque, tom. iii. p.
      50—53.]

      15 (return) [ To find the proofs of his enthusiasm for Rome, I
      need only request that the reader would open, by chance, either
      Petrarch, or his French biographer. The latter has described the
      poet’s first visit to Rome, (tom. i. p. 323—335.) But in the
      place of much idle rhetoric and morality, Petrarch might have
      amused the present and future age with an original account of the
      city and his coronation.]

      16 (return) [ It has been treated by the pen of a Jesuit, the P.
      de Cerceau whose posthumous work (Conjuration de Nicolas Gabrini,
      dit de Rienzi, Tyran de Rome, en 1347) was published at Paris,
      1748, in 12mo. I am indebted to him for some facts and documents
      in John Hocsemius, canon of Liege, a contemporary historian,
      (Fabricius Bibliot. Lat. Med. Ævi, tom. iii. p. 273, tom. iv. p.
      85.)]

      17 (return) [ The abbé de Sade, who so freely expatiates on the
      history of the xivth century, might treat, as his proper subject,
      a revolution in which the heart of Petrarch was so deeply
      engaged, (Mémoires, tom. ii. p. 50, 51, 320—417, notes, p. 70—76,
      tom. iii. p. 221—243, 366—375.) Not an idea or a fact in the
      writings of Petrarch has probably escaped him.]

      18 (return) [ Giovanni Villani, l. xii. c. 89, 104, in Muratori,
      Rerum Italicarum Scriptores, tom. xiii. p. 969, 970, 981—983.]

      19 (return) [ In his third volume of Italian antiquities, (p.
      249—548,) Muratori has inserted the Fragmenta Historiæ Romanæ ab
      Anno 1327 usque ad Annum 1354, in the original dialect of Rome or
      Naples in the xivth century, and a Latin version for the benefit
      of strangers. It contains the most particular and authentic life
      of Cola (Nicholas) di Rienzi; which had been printed at
      Bracciano, 1627, in 4to., under the name of Tomaso Fortifiocca,
      who is only mentioned in this work as having been punished by the
      tribune for forgery. Human nature is scarcely capable of such
      sublime or stupid impartiality: but whosoever in the author of
      these Fragments, he wrote on the spot and at the time, and
      paints, without design or art, the manners of Rome and the
      character of the tribune. * Note: Since the publication of my
      first edition of Gibbon, some new and very remarkable documents
      have been brought to light in a life of Nicolas Rienzi,—Cola di
      Rienzo und seine Zeit,—by Dr. Felix Papencordt. The most
      important of these documents are letters from Rienzi to Charles
      the Fourth, emperor and king of Bohemia, and to the archbishop of
      Praque; they enter into the whole history of his adventurous
      career during its first period, and throw a strong light upon his
      extraordinary character. These documents were first discovered
      and made use of, to a certain extent, by Pelzel, the historian of
      Bohemia. The originals have disappeared, but a copy made by
      Pelzel for his own use is now in the library of Count Thun at
      Teschen. There seems no doubt of their authenticity. Dr.
      Papencordt has printed the whole in his Urkunden, with the
      exception of one long theological paper.—M. 1845.]

      In a quarter of the city which was inhabited only by mechanics
      and Jews, the marriage of an innkeeper and a washer woman
      produced the future deliverer of Rome. 20 201 From such parents
      Nicholas Rienzi Gabrini could inherit neither dignity nor
      fortune; and the gift of a liberal education, which they
      painfully bestowed, was the cause of his glory and untimely end.
      The study of history and eloquence, the writings of Cicero,
      Seneca, Livy, Cæsar, and Valerius Maximus, elevated above his
      equals and contemporaries the genius of the young plebeian: he
      perused with indefatigable diligence the manuscripts and marbles
      of antiquity; loved to dispense his knowledge in familiar
      language; and was often provoked to exclaim, “Where are now these
      Romans? their virtue, their justice, their power? why was I not
      born in those happy times?” 21 When the republic addressed to the
      throne of Avignon an embassy of the three orders, the spirit and
      eloquence of Rienzi recommended him to a place among the thirteen
      deputies of the commons. The orator had the honor of haranguing
      Pope Clement the Sixth, and the satisfaction of conversing with
      Petrarch, a congenial mind: but his aspiring hopes were chilled
      by disgrace and poverty and the patriot was reduced to a single
      garment and the charity of the hospital. 211 From this misery he
      was relieved by the sense of merit or the smile of favor; and the
      employment of apostolic notary afforded him a daily stipend of
      five gold florins, a more honorable and extensive connection, and
      the right of contrasting, both in words and actions, his own
      integrity with the vices of the state. The eloquence of Rienzi
      was prompt and persuasive: the multitude is always prone to envy
      and censure: he was stimulated by the loss of a brother and the
      impunity of the assassins; nor was it possible to excuse or
      exaggerate the public calamities. The blessings of peace and
      justice, for which civil society has been instituted, were
      banished from Rome: the jealous citizens, who might have endured
      every personal or pecuniary injury, were most deeply wounded in
      the dishonor of their wives and daughters: 22 they were equally
      oppressed by the arrogance of the nobles and the corruption of
      the magistrates; 221 and the abuse of arms or of laws was the
      only circumstance that distinguished the lions from the dogs and
      serpents of the Capitol. These allegorical emblems were variously
      repeated in the pictures which Rienzi exhibited in the streets
      and churches; and while the spectators gazed with curious wonder,
      the bold and ready orator unfolded the meaning, applied the
      satire, inflamed their passions, and announced a distant hope of
      comfort and deliverance. The privileges of Rome, her eternal
      sovereignty over her princes and provinces, was the theme of his
      public and private discourse; and a monument of servitude became
      in his hands a title and incentive of liberty. The decree of the
      senate, which granted the most ample prerogatives to the emperor
      Vespasian, had been inscribed on a copper plate still extant in
      the choir of the church of St. John Lateran. 23 A numerous
      assembly of nobles and plebeians was invited to this political
      lecture, and a convenient theatre was erected for their
      reception. The notary appeared in a magnificent and mysterious
      habit, explained the inscription by a version and commentary, 24
      and descanted with eloquence and zeal on the ancient glories of
      the senate and people, from whom all legal authority was derived.
      The supine ignorance of the nobles was incapable of discerning
      the serious tendency of such representations: they might
      sometimes chastise with words and blows the plebeian reformer;
      but he was often suffered in the Colonna palace to amuse the
      company with his threats and predictions; and the modern Brutus
      25 was concealed under the mask of folly and the character of a
      buffoon. While they indulged their contempt, the restoration of
      the _good estate_, his favorite expression, was entertained among
      the people as a desirable, a possible, and at length as an
      approaching, event; and while all had the disposition to applaud,
      some had the courage to assist, their promised deliverer.

      20 (return) [ The first and splendid period of Rienzi, his
      tribunitian government, is contained in the xviiith chapter of
      the Fragments, (p. 399—479,) which, in the new division, forms
      the iid book of the history in xxxviii. smaller chapters or
      sections.]

      201 (return) [ But see in Dr. Papencordt’s work, and in Rienzi’s
      own words, his claim to be a bastard son of the emperor Henry the
      Seventh, whose intrigue with his mother Rienzi relates with a
      sort of proud shamelessness. Compare account by the editor of Dr.
      Papencordt’s work in Quarterly Review vol. lxix.—M. 1845.]

      21 (return) [ The reader may be pleased with a specimen of the
      original idiom: Fò da soa juventutine nutricato di latte de
      eloquentia, bono gramatico, megliore rettuorico, autorista bravo.
      Deh como et quanto era veloce leitore! moito usava Tito Livio,
      Seneca, et Tullio, et Balerio Massimo, moito li dilettava le
      magnificentie di Julio Cesare raccontare. Tutta la die se
      speculava negl’ intagli di marmo lequali iaccio intorno Roma. Non
      era altri che esso, che sapesse lejere li antichi pataffii. Tutte
      scritture antiche vulgarizzava; quesse fiure di marmo justamente
      interpretava. On come spesso diceva, “Dove suono quelli buoni
      Romani? dove ene loro somma justitia? poleramme trovare in tempo
      che quessi fiuriano!”]

      211 (return) [ Sir J. Hobhouse published (in his Illustrations of
      Childe Harold) Rienzi’s joyful letter to the people of Rome on
      the apparently favorable termination of this mission.—M. 1845.]

      22 (return) [ Petrarch compares the jealousy of the Romans with
      the easy temper of the husbands of Avignon, (Mémoires, tom. i. p.
      330.)]

      221 (return) [ All this Rienzi, writing at a later period to the
      archbishop of Prague, attributed to the criminal abandonment of
      his flock by the supreme pontiff. See Urkunde apud Papencordt, p.
      xliv. Quarterly Review, p. 255.—M. 1845.]

      23 (return) [ The fragments of the _Lex regia_ may be found in
      the Inscriptions of Gruter, tom. i. p. 242, and at the end of the
      Tacitus of Ernesti, with some learned notes of the editor, tom.
      ii.]

      24 (return) [ I cannot overlook a stupendous and laughable
      blunder of Rienzi. The Lex regia empowers Vespasian to enlarge
      the Pomrium, a word familiar to every antiquary. It was not so to
      the tribune; he confounds it with pom_a_rium, an orchard,
      translates lo Jardino de Roma cioene Italia, and is copied by the
      less excusable ignorance of the Latin translator (p. 406) and the
      French historian, (p. 33.) Even the learning of Muratori has
      slumbered over the passage.]

      25 (return) [ Priori (_Bruto_) tamen similior, juvenis uterque,
      longe ingenio quam cujus simulationem induerat, ut sub hoc
      obtentû liberator ille P R. aperiretur tempore suo.... Ille
      regibus, hic tyrannis contemptus, (Opp. p. 536.) * Note: Fatcor
      attamen quod-nunc fatuum. nunc hystrionem, nunc gravem nunc
      simplicem, nunc astutum, nunc fervidum, nunc timidum simulatorem,
      et dissimulatorem ad hunc caritativum finem, quem dixi,
      constitusepius memet ipsum. Writing to an archbishop, (of
      Prague,) Rienzi alleges scriptural examples. Saltator coram archa
      David et insanus apparuit coram Rege; blanda, astuta, et tecta
      Judith astitit Holoferni; et astute Jacob meruit benedici,
      Urkunde xlix.—M. 1845.]

      A prophecy, or rather a summons, affixed on the church door of
      St. George, was the first public evidence of his designs; a
      nocturnal assembly of a hundred citizens on Mount Aventine, the
      first step to their execution. After an oath of secrecy and aid,
      he represented to the conspirators the importance and facility of
      their enterprise; that the nobles, without union or resources,
      were strong only in the fear nobles, of their imaginary strength;
      that all power, as well as right, was in the hands of the people;
      that the revenues of the apostolical chamber might relieve the
      public distress; and that the pope himself would approve their
      victory over the common enemies of government and freedom. After
      securing a faithful band to protect his first declaration, he
      proclaimed through the city, by sound of trumpet, that on the
      evening of the following day, all persons should assemble without
      arms before the church of St. Angelo, to provide for the
      reestablishment of the good estate. The whole night was employed
      in the celebration of thirty masses of the Holy Ghost; and in the
      morning, Rienzi, bareheaded, but in complete armor, issued from
      the church, encompassed by the hundred conspirators. The pope’s
      vicar, the simple bishop of Orvieto, who had been persuaded to
      sustain a part in this singular ceremony, marched on his right
      hand; and three great standards were borne aloft as the emblems
      of their design. In the first, the banner of _liberty_, Rome was
      seated on two lions, with a palm in one hand and a globe in the
      other; St. Paul, with a drawn sword, was delineated in the banner
      of _justice_; and in the third, St. Peter held the keys of
      _concord_ and _peace_. Rienzi was encouraged by the presence and
      applause of an innumerable crowd, who understood little, and
      hoped much; and the procession slowly rolled forwards from the
      castle of St. Angelo to the Capitol. His triumph was disturbed by
      some secret emotions which he labored to suppress: he ascended
      without opposition, and with seeming confidence, the citadel of
      the republic; harangued the people from the balcony; and received
      the most flattering confirmation of his acts and laws. The
      nobles, as if destitute of arms and counsels, beheld in silent
      consternation this strange revolution; and the moment had been
      prudently chosen, when the most formidable, Stephen Colonna, was
      absent from the city. On the first rumor, he returned to his
      palace, affected to despise this plebeian tumult, and declared to
      the messenger of Rienzi, that at his leisure he would cast the
      madman from the windows of the Capitol. The great bell instantly
      rang an alarm, and so rapid was the tide, so urgent was the
      danger, that Colonna escaped with precipitation to the suburb of
      St. Laurence: from thence, after a moment’s refreshment, he
      continued the same speedy career till he reached in safety his
      castle of Palestrina; lamenting his own imprudence, which had not
      trampled the spark of this mighty conflagration. A general and
      peremptory order was issued from the Capitol to all the nobles,
      that they should peaceably retire to their estates: they obeyed;
      and their departure secured the tranquillity of the free and
      obedient citizens of Rome.

      But such voluntary obedience evaporates with the first transports
      of zeal; and Rienzi felt the importance of justifying his
      usurpation by a regular form and a legal title. At his own
      choice, the Roman people would have displayed their attachment
      and authority, by lavishing on his head the names of senator or
      consul, of king or emperor: he preferred the ancient and modest
      appellation of tribune; 251 the protection of the commons was the
      essence of that sacred office; and they were ignorant, that it
      had never been invested with any share in the legislative or
      executive powers of the republic. In this character, and with the
      consent of the Roman, the tribune enacted the most salutary laws
      for the restoration and maintenance of the good estate. By the
      first he fulfils the wish of honesty and inexperience, that no
      civil suit should be protracted beyond the term of fifteen days.
      The danger of frequent perjury might justify the pronouncing
      against a false accuser the same penalty which his evidence would
      have inflicted: the disorders of the times might compel the
      legislator to punish every homicide with death, and every injury
      with equal retaliation. But the execution of justice was hopeless
      till he had previously abolished the tyranny of the nobles. It
      was formally provided, that none, except the supreme magistrate,
      should possess or command the gates, bridges, or towers of the
      state; that no private garrisons should be introduced into the
      towns or castles of the Roman territory; that none should bear
      arms, or presume to fortify their houses in the city or country;
      that the barons should be responsible for the safety of the
      highways, and the free passage of provisions; and that the
      protection of malefactors and robbers should be expiated by a
      fine of a thousand marks of silver. But these regulations would
      have been impotent and nugatory, had not the licentious nobles
      been awed by the sword of the civil power. A sudden alarm from
      the bell of the Capitol could still summon to the standard above
      twenty thousand volunteers: the support of the tribune and the
      laws required a more regular and permanent force. In each harbor
      of the coast a vessel was stationed for the assurance of
      commerce; a standing militia of three hundred and sixty horse and
      thirteen hundred foot was levied, clothed, and paid in the
      thirteen quarters of the city: and the spirit of a commonwealth
      may be traced in the grateful allowance of one hundred florins,
      or pounds, to the heirs of every soldier who lost his life in the
      service of his country. For the maintenance of the public
      defence, for the establishment of granaries, for the relief of
      widows, orphans, and indigent convents, Rienzi applied, without
      fear of sacrilege, the revenues of the apostolic chamber: the
      three branches of hearth-money, the salt-duty, and the customs,
      were each of the annual produce of one hundred thousand florins;
      26 and scandalous were the abuses, if in four or five months the
      amount of the salt-duty could be trebled by his judicious
      economy. After thus restoring the forces and finances of the
      republic, the tribune recalled the nobles from their solitary
      independence; required their personal appearance in the Capitol;
      and imposed an oath of allegiance to the new government, and of
      submission to the laws of the good estate. Apprehensive for their
      safety, but still more apprehensive of the danger of a refusal,
      the princes and barons returned to their houses at Rome in the
      garb of simple and peaceful citizens: the Colonna and Ursini, the
      Savelli and Frangipani, were confounded before the tribunal of a
      plebeian, of the vile buffoon whom they had so often derided, and
      their disgrace was aggravated by the indignation which they
      vainly struggled to disguise. The same oath was successively
      pronounced by the several orders of society, the clergy and
      gentlemen, the judges and notaries, the merchants and artisans,
      and the gradual descent was marked by the increase of sincerity
      and zeal. They swore to live and die with the republic and the
      church, whose interest was artfully united by the nominal
      association of the bishop of Orvieto, the pope’s vicar, to the
      office of tribune. It was the boast of Rienzi, that he had
      delivered the throne and patrimony of St. Peter from a rebellious
      aristocracy; and Clement the Sixth, who rejoiced in its fall,
      affected to believe the professions, to applaud the merits, and
      to confirm the title, of his trusty servant. The speech, perhaps
      the mind, of the tribune, was inspired with a lively regard for
      the purity of the faith: he insinuated his claim to a
      supernatural mission from the Holy Ghost; enforced by a heavy
      forfeiture the annual duty of confession and communion; and
      strictly guarded the spiritual as well as temporal welfare of his
      faithful people. 27

      251 (return) [ Et ego, Deo semper auctore, ipsa die pristinâ
      (leg. primâ) Tribunatus, quæ quidem dignitas a tempore deflorati
      Imperii, et per annos Vo et ultra sub tyrannicà occupatione
      vacavit, ipsos omnes potentes indifferenter Deum at justitiam
      odientes, a meâ, ymo a Dei facie fugiendo vehementi Spiritu
      dissipavi, et nullo effuso cruore trementes expuli, sine ictu
      remanente Romane terre facie renovatâ. Libellus Tribuni ad
      Cæsarem, p. xxxiv.—M. 1845.]

      26 (return) [ In one MS. I read (l. ii. c. 4, p. 409) perfumante
      quatro _solli_, in another, quatro _florini_, an important
      variety, since the florin was worth ten Roman _solidi_,
      (Muratori, dissert. xxviii.) The former reading would give us a
      population of 25,000, the latter of 250,000 families; and I much
      fear, that the former is more consistent with the decay of Rome
      and her territory.]

      27 (return) [ Hocsemius, p. 498, apud du Cerçeau, Hist. de
      Rienzi, p. 194. The fifteen tribunitian laws may be found in the
      Roman historian (whom for brevity I shall name) Fortifiocca, l.
      ii. c. 4.]




      Chapter LXX: Final Settlement Of The Ecclesiastical State.—Part
      II.

      Never perhaps has the energy and effect of a single mind been
      more remarkably felt than in the sudden, though transient,
      reformation of Rome by the tribune Rienzi. A den of robbers was
      converted to the discipline of a camp or convent: patient to
      hear, swift to redress, inexorable to punish, his tribunal was
      always accessible to the poor and stranger; nor could birth, or
      dignity, or the immunities of the church, protect the offender or
      his accomplices. The privileged houses, the private sanctuaries
      in Rome, on which no officer of justice would presume to
      trespass, were abolished; and he applied the timber and iron of
      their barricades in the fortifications of the Capitol. The
      venerable father of the Colonna was exposed in his own palace to
      the double shame of being desirous, and of being unable, to
      protect a criminal. A mule, with a jar of oil, had been stolen
      near Capranica; and the lord of the Ursini family was condemned
      to restore the damage, and to discharge a fine of four hundred
      florins for his negligence in guarding the highways. Nor were the
      persons of the barons more inviolate than their lands or houses;
      and, either from accident or design, the same impartial rigor was
      exercised against the heads of the adverse factions. Peter Agapet
      Colonna, who had himself been senator of Rome, was arrested in
      the street for injury or debt; and justice was appeased by the
      tardy execution of Martin Ursini, who, among his various acts of
      violence and rapine, had pillaged a shipwrecked vessel at the
      mouth of the Tyber. 28 His name, the purple of two cardinals, his
      uncles, a recent marriage, and a mortal disease were disregarded
      by the inflexible tribune, who had chosen his victim. The public
      officers dragged him from his palace and nuptial bed: his trial
      was short and satisfactory: the bell of the Capitol convened the
      people: stripped of his mantle, on his knees, with his hands
      bound behind his back, he heard the sentence of death; and after
      a brief confession, Ursini was led away to the gallows. After
      such an example, none who were conscious of guilt could hope for
      impunity, and the flight of the wicked, the licentious, and the
      idle, soon purified the city and territory of Rome. In this time
      (says the historian,) the woods began to rejoice that they were
      no longer infested with robbers; the oxen began to plough; the
      pilgrims visited the sanctuaries; the roads and inns were
      replenished with travellers; trade, plenty, and good faith, were
      restored in the markets; and a purse of gold might be exposed
      without danger in the midst of the highway. As soon as the life
      and property of the subject are secure, the labors and rewards of
      industry spontaneously revive: Rome was still the metropolis of
      the Christian world; and the fame and fortunes of the tribune
      were diffused in every country by the strangers who had enjoyed
      the blessings of his government.

      28 (return) [ Fortifiocca, l. ii. c. 11. From the account of this
      shipwreck, we learn some circumstances of the trade and
      navigation of the age. 1. The ship was built and freighted at
      Naples for the ports of Marseilles and Avignon. 2. The sailors
      were of Naples and the Isle of naria less skilful than those of
      Sicily and Genoa. 3. The navigation from Marseilles was a
      coasting voyage to the mouth of the Tyber, where they took
      shelter in a storm; but, instead of finding the current,
      unfortunately ran on a shoal: the vessel was stranded, the
      mariners escaped. 4. The cargo, which was pillaged, consisted of
      the revenue of Provence for the royal treasury, many bags of
      pepper and cinnamon, and bales of French cloth, to the value of
      20,000 florins; a rich prize.]

      The deliverance of his country inspired Rienzi with a vast, and
      perhaps visionary, idea of uniting Italy in a great federative
      republic, of which Rome should be the ancient and lawful head,
      and the free cities and princes the members and associates. His
      pen was not less eloquent than his tongue; and his numerous
      epistles were delivered to swift and trusty messengers. On foot,
      with a white wand in their hand, they traversed the forests and
      mountains; enjoyed, in the most hostile states, the sacred
      security of ambassadors; and reported, in the style of flattery
      or truth, that the highways along their passage were lined with
      kneeling multitudes, who implored Heaven for the success of their
      undertaking. Could passion have listened to reason; could private
      interest have yielded to the public welfare; the supreme tribunal
      and confederate union of the Italian republic might have healed
      their intestine discord, and closed the Alps against the
      Barbarians of the North. But the propitious season had elapsed;
      and if Venice, Florence, Sienna, Perugia, and many inferior
      cities offered their lives and fortunes to the good estate, the
      tyrants of Lombardy and Tuscany must despise, or hate, the
      plebeian author of a free constitution. From them, however, and
      from every part of Italy, the tribune received the most friendly
      and respectful answers: they were followed by the ambassadors of
      the princes and republics; and in this foreign conflux, on all
      the occasions of pleasure or business, the low born notary could
      assume the familiar or majestic courtesy of a sovereign. 29 The
      most glorious circumstance of his reign was an appeal to his
      justice from Lewis, king of Hungary, who complained, that his
      brother and her husband had been perfidiously strangled by Jane,
      queen of Naples: 30 her guilt or innocence was pleaded in a
      solemn trial at Rome; but after hearing the advocates, 31 the
      tribune adjourned this weighty and invidious cause, which was
      soon determined by the sword of the Hungarian. Beyond the Alps,
      more especially at Avignon, the revolution was the theme of
      curiosity, wonder, and applause. 311 Petrarch had been the
      private friend, perhaps the secret counsellor, of Rienzi: his
      writings breathe the most ardent spirit of patriotism and joy;
      and all respect for the pope, all gratitude for the Colonna, was
      lost in the superior duties of a Roman citizen. The poet-laureate
      of the Capitol maintains the act, applauds the hero, and mingles
      with some apprehension and advice, the most lofty hopes of the
      permanent and rising greatness of the republic. 32

      29 (return) [ It was thus that Oliver Cromwell’s old
      acquaintance, who remembered his vulgar and ungracious entrance
      into the House of Commons, were astonished at the ease and
      majesty of the protector on his throne, (See Harris’s Life of
      Cromwell, p. 27—34, from Clarendon Warwick, Whitelocke, Waller,
      &c.) The consciousness of merit and power will sometimes elevate
      the manners to the station.]

      30 (return) [ See the causes, circumstances, and effects of the
      death of Andrew in Giannone, (tom. iii. l. xxiii. p. 220—229,)
      and the Life of Petrarch (Mémoires, tom. ii. p. 143—148, 245—250,
      375—379, notes, p. 21—37.) The abbé de Sade _wishes_ to extenuate
      her guilt.]

      31 (return) [ The advocate who pleaded against Jane could add
      nothing to the logical force and brevity of his master’s epistle.
      Johanna! inordinata vita præcedens, retentio potestatis in regno,
      neglecta vindicta, vir alter susceptus, et excusatio subsequens,
      necis viri tui te probant fuisse participem et consortem. Jane of
      Naples, and Mary of Scotland, have a singular conformity.]

      311 (return) [ In his letter to the archbishop of Prague, Rienzi
      thus describes the effect of his elevation on Italy and on the
      world: “Did I not restore real peace among the cities which were
      distracted by factions? did I not cause all the citizens, exiled
      by party violence, with their wretched wives and children, to be
      readmitted? had I not begun to extinguish the factious names
      (scismatica nomina) of Guelf and Ghibelline, for which countless
      thousands had perished body and soul, under the eyes of their
      pastors, by the reduction of the city of Rome and all Italy into
      one amicable, peaceful, holy, and united confederacy? the
      consecrated standards and banners having been by me collected and
      blended together, and, in witness to our holy association and
      perfect union, offered up in the presence of the ambassadors of
      all the cities of Italy, on the day of the assumption of our
      Blessed Lady.” p. xlvii. ——In the Libellus ad Cæsarem: “I
      received the homage and submission of all the sovereigns of
      Apulia, the barons and counts, and almost all the people of
      Italy. I was honored by solemn embassies and letters by the
      emperor of Constantinople and the king of England. The queen of
      Naples submitted herself and her kingdom to the protection of the
      tribune. The king of Hungary, by two solemn embassies, brought
      his cause against his queen and his nobles before my tribunal;
      and I venture to say further, that the fame of the tribune
      alarmed the soldan of Babylon. When the Christian pilgrims to the
      sepulchre of our Lord related to the Christian and Jewish
      inhabitants of Jerusalem all the yet unheard-of and wonderful
      circumstances of the reformation in Rome, both Jews and
      Christians celebrated the event with unusual festivities. When
      the soldan inquired the cause of these rejoicings, and received
      this intelligence about Rome, he ordered all the havens and
      cities on the coast to be fortified, and put in a state of
      defence,” p. xxxv.—M. 1845.]

      32 (return) [ See the Epistola Hortatoria de Capessenda
      Republica, from Petrarch to Nicholas Rienzi, (Opp. p. 535—540,)
      and the vth eclogue or pastoral, a perpetual and obscure
      allegory.]

      While Petrarch indulged these prophetic visions, the Roman hero
      was fast declining from the meridian of fame and power; and the
      people, who had gazed with astonishment on the ascending meteor,
      began to mark the irregularity of its course, and the
      vicissitudes of light and obscurity. More eloquent than
      judicious, more enterprising than resolute, the faculties of
      Rienzi were not balanced by cool and commanding reason: he
      magnified in a tenfold proportion the objects of hope and fear;
      and prudence, which could not have erected, did not presume to
      fortify, his throne. In the blaze of prosperity, his virtues were
      insensibly tinctured with the adjacent vices; justice with
      cruelty, liberality with profusion, and the desire of fame with
      puerile and ostentatious vanity. 321 He might have learned, that
      the ancient tribunes, so strong and sacred in the public opinion,
      were not distinguished in style, habit, or appearance, from an
      ordinary plebeian; 33 and that as often as they visited the city
      on foot, a single viator, or beadle, attended the exercise of
      their office. The Gracchi would have frowned or smiled, could
      they have read the sonorous titles and epithets of their
      successor, “Nicholas, severe and merciful; deliverer of Rome;
      defender of Italy; 34 friend of mankind, and of liberty, peace,
      and justice; tribune august:” his theatrical pageants had
      prepared the revolution; but Rienzi abused, in luxury and pride,
      the political maxim of speaking to the eyes, as well as the
      understanding, of the multitude. From nature he had received the
      gift of a handsome person, 35 till it was swelled and disfigured
      by intemperance: and his propensity to laughter was corrected in
      the magistrate by the affectation of gravity and sternness. He
      was clothed, at least on public occasions, in a party-colored
      robe of velvet or satin, lined with fur, and embroidered with
      gold: the rod of justice, which he carried in his hand, was a
      sceptre of polished steel, crowned with a globe and cross of
      gold, and enclosing a small fragment of the true and holy wood.
      In his civil and religious processions through the city, he rode
      on a white steed, the symbol of royalty: the great banner of the
      republic, a sun with a circle of stars, a dove with an olive
      branch, was displayed over his head; a shower of gold and silver
      was scattered among the populace, fifty guards with halberds
      encompassed his person; a troop of horse preceded his march; and
      their tymbals and trumpets were of massy silver.

      321 (return) [ An illustrious female writer has drawn, with a
      single stroke, the character of Rienzi, Crescentius, and Arnold
      of Brescia, the fond restorers of Roman liberty: ‘Qui ont pris
      les souvenirs pour les espérances.’ Corinne, tom. i. p. 159.
      “Could Tacitus have excelled this?” Hallam, vol i p. 418.—M.]

      33 (return) [ In his Roman Questions, Plutarch (Opuscul. tom. i.
      p. 505, 506, edit. Græc. Hen. Steph.) states, on the most
      constitutional principles, the simple greatness of the tribunes,
      who were not properly magistrates, but a check on magistracy. It
      was their duty and interest omoiousqai schmati, kai stolh kai
      diaithtoiV epitugcanousi tvn politvn.... katapateisqai dei (a
      saying of C. Curio) kai mh semnon einai th oyei mhde
      dusprosodon... osw de mallon ektapeinoutai tv swmati, tosoutw
      mallon auxetai th dunamei, &c. Rienzi, and Petrarch himself, were
      incapable perhaps of reading a Greek philosopher; but they might
      have imbibed the same modest doctrines from their favorite
      Latins, Livy and Valerius Maximus.]

      34 (return) [ I could not express in English the forcible, though
      barbarous, title of _Zelator_ Italiæ, which Rienzi assumed.]

      35 (return) [ Era bell’ homo, (l. ii. c. l. p. 399.) It is
      remarkable, that the riso sarcastico of the Bracciano edition is
      wanting in the Roman MS., from which Muratori has given the text.
      In his second reign, when he is painted almost as a monster,
      Rienzi travea una ventresca tonna trionfale, a modo de uno Abbate
      Asiano, or Asinino, (l. iii. c. 18, p. 523.)]

      The ambition of the honors of chivalry 36 betrayed the meanness
      of his birth, and degraded the importance of his office; and the
      equestrian tribune was not less odious to the nobles, whom he
      adopted, than to the plebeians, whom he deserted. All that yet
      remained of treasure, or luxury, or art, was exhausted on that
      solemn day. Rienzi led the procession from the Capitol to the
      Lateran; the tediousness of the way was relieved with decorations
      and games; the ecclesiastical, civil, and military orders marched
      under their various banners; the Roman ladies attended his wife;
      and the ambassadors of Italy might loudly applaud or secretly
      deride the novelty of the pomp. In the evening, which they had
      reached the church and palace of Constantine, he thanked and
      dismissed the numerous assembly, with an invitation to the
      festival of the ensuing day. From the hands of a venerable knight
      he received the order of the Holy Ghost; the purification of the
      bath was a previous ceremony; but in no step of his life did
      Rienzi excite such scandal and censure as by the profane use of
      the porphyry vase, in which Constantine (a foolish legend) had
      been healed of his leprosy by Pope Sylvester. 37 With equal
      presumption the tribune watched or reposed within the consecrated
      precincts of the baptistery; and the failure of his state-bed was
      interpreted as an omen of his approaching downfall. At the hour
      of worship, he showed himself to the returning crowds in a
      majestic attitude, with a robe of purple, his sword, and gilt
      spurs; but the holy rites were soon interrupted by his levity and
      insolence. Rising from his throne, and advancing towards the
      congregation, he proclaimed in a loud voice: “We summon to our
      tribunal Pope Clement: and command him to reside in his diocese
      of Rome: we also summon the sacred college of cardinals. 38 We
      again summon the two pretenders, Charles of Bohemia and Lewis of
      Bavaria, who style themselves emperors: we likewise summon all
      the electors of Germany, to inform us on what pretence they have
      usurped the inalienable right of the Roman people, the ancient
      and lawful sovereigns of the empire.” 39 Unsheathing his maiden
      sword, he thrice brandished it to the three parts of the world,
      and thrice repeated the extravagant declaration, “And this too is
      mine!” The pope’s vicar, the bishop of Orvieto, attempted to
      check this career of folly; but his feeble protest was silenced
      by martial music; and instead of withdrawing from the assembly,
      he consented to dine with his brother tribune, at a table which
      had hitherto been reserved for the supreme pontiff. A banquet,
      such as the Cæsars had given, was prepared for the Romans. The
      apartments, porticos, and courts of the Lateran were spread with
      innumerable tables for either sex, and every condition; a stream
      of wine flowed from the nostrils of Constantine’s brazen horse;
      no complaint, except of the scarcity of water, could be heard;
      and the licentiousness of the multitude was curbed by discipline
      and fear. A subsequent day was appointed for the coronation of
      Rienzi; 40 seven crowns of different leaves or metals were
      successively placed on his head by the most eminent of the Roman
      clergy; they represented the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost; and
      he still professed to imitate the example of the ancient
      tribunes. 401 These extraordinary spectacles might deceive or
      flatter the people; and their own vanity was gratified in the
      vanity of their leader. But in his private life he soon deviated
      from the strict rule of frugality and abstinence; and the
      plebeians, who were awed by the splendor of the nobles, were
      provoked by the luxury of their equal. His wife, his son, his
      uncle, (a barber in name and profession,) exposed the contrast of
      vulgar manners and princely expense; and without acquiring the
      majesty, Rienzi degenerated into the vices, of a king.

      36 (return) [ Strange as it may seem, this festival was not
      without a precedent. In the year 1327, two barons, a Colonna and
      an Ursini, the usual balance, were created knights by the Roman
      people: their bath was of rose-water, their beds were decked with
      royal magnificence, and they were served at St. Maria of Araceli
      in the Capitol, by the twenty-eight _buoni huomini_. They
      afterwards received from Robert, king of Naples, the sword of
      chivalry, (Hist. Rom. l. i. c. 2, p. 259.)]

      37 (return) [ All parties believed in the leprosy and bath of
      Constantine (Petrarch. Epist. Famil. vi. 2,) and Rienzi justified
      his own conduct by observing to the court of Avignon, that a vase
      which had been used by a Pagan could not be profaned by a pious
      Christian. Yet this crime is specified in the bull of
      excommunication, (Hocsemius, apud du Cerçeau, p. 189, 190.)]

      38 (return) [ This _verbal_ summons of Pope Clement VI., which
      rests on the authority of the Roman historian and a Vatican MS.,
      is disputed by the biographer of Petrarch, (tom. ii. not. p.
      70—76), with arguments rather of decency than of weight. The
      court of Avignon might not choose to agitate this delicate
      question.]

      39 (return) [ The summons of the two rival emperors, a monument
      of freedom and folly, is extant in Hocsemius, (Cerçeau, p.
      163—166.)]

      40 (return) [ It is singular, that the Roman historian should
      have overlooked this sevenfold coronation, which is sufficiently
      proved by internal evidence, and the testimony of Hocsemius, and
      even of Rienzi, (Cercean p. 167—170, 229.)]

      401 (return) [ It was on this occasion that he made the profane
      comparison between himself and our Lord; and the striking
      circumstance took place which he relates in his letter to the
      archbishop of Prague. In the midst of all the wild and joyous
      exultation of the people, one of his most zealous supporters, a
      monk, who was in high repute for his sanctity, stood apart in a
      corner of the church and wept bitterly! A domestic chaplain of
      Rienzi’s inquired the cause of his grief. “Now,” replied the man
      of God, “is thy master cast down from heaven—never saw I man so
      proud. By the aid of the Holy Ghost he has driven the tyrants
      from the city without drawing a sword; the cities and the
      sovereigns of Italy have submitted to his power. Why is he so
      arrogant and ungrateful towards the Most High? Why does he seek
      earthly and transitory rewards for his labors, and in his wanton
      speech liken himself to the Creator? Tell thy master that he can
      only atone for this offence by tears of penitence.” In the
      evening the chaplain communicated this solemn rebuke to the
      tribune: it appalled him for the time, but was soon forgotten in
      the tumult and hurry of business.—M. 1845.]

      A simple citizen describes with pity, or perhaps with pleasure,
      the humiliation of the barons of Rome. “Bareheaded, their hands
      crossed on their breast, they stood with downcast looks in the
      presence of the tribune; and they trembled, good God, how they
      trembled!” 41 As long as the yoke of Rienzi was that of justice
      and their country, their conscience forced them to esteem the
      man, whom pride and interest provoked them to hate: his
      extravagant conduct soon fortified their hatred by contempt; and
      they conceived the hope of subverting a power which was no longer
      so deeply rooted in the public confidence. The old animosity of
      the Colonna and Ursini was suspended for a moment by their common
      disgrace: they associated their wishes, and perhaps their
      designs; an assassin was seized and tortured; he accused the
      nobles; and as soon as Rienzi deserved the fate, he adopted the
      suspicions and maxims, of a tyrant. On the same day, under
      various pretences, he invited to the Capitol his principal
      enemies, among whom were five members of the Ursini and three of
      the Colonna name. But instead of a council or a banquet, they
      found themselves prisoners under the sword of despotism or
      justice; and the consciousness of innocence or guilt might
      inspire them with equal apprehensions of danger. At the sound of
      the great bell the people assembled; they were arraigned for a
      conspiracy against the tribune’s life; and though some might
      sympathize in their distress, not a hand, nor a voice, was raised
      to rescue the first of the nobility from their impending doom.
      Their apparent boldness was prompted by despair; they passed in
      separate chambers a sleepless and painful night; and the
      venerable hero, Stephen Colonna, striking against the door of his
      prison, repeatedly urged his guards to deliver him by a speedy
      death from such ignominious servitude. In the morning they
      understood their sentence from the visit of a confessor and the
      tolling of the bell. The great hall of the Capitol had been
      decorated for the bloody scene with red and white hangings: the
      countenance of the tribune was dark and severe; the swords of the
      executioners were unsheathed; and the barons were interrupted in
      their dying speeches by the sound of trumpets. But in this
      decisive moment, Rienzi was not less anxious or apprehensive than
      his captives: he dreaded the splendor of their names, their
      surviving kinsmen, the inconstancy of the people, the reproaches
      of the world, and, after rashly offering a mortal injury, he
      vainly presumed that, if he could forgive, he might himself be
      forgiven. His elaborate oration was that of a Christian and a
      suppliant; and, as the humble minister of the commons, he
      entreated his masters to pardon these noble criminals, for whose
      repentance and future service he pledged his faith and authority.
      “If you are spared,” said the tribune, “by the mercy of the
      Romans, will you not promise to support the good estate with your
      lives and fortunes?” Astonished by this marvellous clemency, the
      barons bowed their heads; and while they devoutly repeated the
      oath of allegiance, might whisper a secret, and more sincere,
      assurance of revenge. A priest, in the name of the people,
      pronounced their absolution: they received the communion with the
      tribune, assisted at the banquet, followed the procession; and,
      after every spiritual and temporal sign of reconciliation, were
      dismissed in safety to their respective homes, with the new
      honors and titles of generals, consuls, and patricians. 42

      41 (return) [ Puoi se faceva stare denante a se, mentre sedeva,
      li baroni tutti in piedi ritti co le vraccia piecate, e co li
      capucci tratti. Deh como stavano paurosi! (Hist. Rom. l. ii. c.
      20, p. 439.) He saw them, and we see them.]

      42 (return) [ The original letter, in which Rienzi justifies his
      treatment of the Colonna, (Hocsemius, apud du Cerçeau, p.
      222—229,) displays, in genuine colors, the mixture of the knave
      and the madman.]

      During some weeks they were checked by the memory of their
      danger, rather than of their deliverance, till the most powerful
      of the Ursini, escaping with the Colonna from the city, erected
      at Marino the standard of rebellion. The fortifications of the
      castle were instantly restored; the vassals attended their lord;
      the outlaws armed against the magistrate; the flocks and herds,
      the harvests and vineyards, from Marino to the gates of Rome,
      were swept away or destroyed; and the people arraigned Rienzi as
      the author of the calamities which his government had taught them
      to forget. In the camp, Rienzi appeared to less advantage than in
      the rostrum; and he neglected the progress of the rebel barons
      till their numbers were strong, and their castles impregnable.
      From the pages of Livy he had not imbibed the art, or even the
      courage, of a general: an army of twenty thousand Romans returned
      without honor or effect from the attack of Marino; and his
      vengeance was amused by painting his enemies, their heads
      downwards, and drowning two dogs (at least they should have been
      bears) as the representatives of the Ursini. The belief of his
      incapacity encouraged their operations: they were invited by
      their secret adherents; and the barons attempted, with four
      thousand foot, and sixteen hundred horse, to enter Rome by force
      or surprise. The city was prepared for their reception; the
      alarm-bell rung all night; the gates were strictly guarded, or
      insolently open; and after some hesitation they sounded a
      retreat. The two first divisions had passed along the walls, but
      the prospect of a free entrance tempted the headstrong valor of
      the nobles in the rear; and after a successful skirmish, they
      were overthrown and massacred without quarter by the crowds of
      the Roman people. Stephen Colonna the younger, the noble spirit
      to whom Petrarch ascribed the restoration of Italy, was preceded
      or accompanied in death by his son John, a gallant youth, by his
      brother Peter, who might regret the ease and honors of the
      church, by a nephew of legitimate birth, and by two bastards of
      the Colonna race; and the number of seven, the seven crowns, as
      Rienzi styled them, of the Holy Ghost, was completed by the agony
      of the deplorable parent, and the veteran chief, who had survived
      the hope and fortune of his house. The vision and prophecies of
      St. Martin and Pope Boniface had been used by the tribune to
      animate his troops: 43 he displayed, at least in the pursuit, the
      spirit of a hero; but he forgot the maxims of the ancient Romans,
      who abhorred the triumphs of civil war. The conqueror ascended
      the Capitol; deposited his crown and sceptre on the altar; and
      boasted, with some truth, that he had cut off an ear, which
      neither pope nor emperor had been able to amputate. 44 His base
      and implacable revenge denied the honors of burial; and the
      bodies of the Colonna, which he threatened to expose with those
      of the vilest malefactors, were secretly interred by the holy
      virgins of their name and family. 45 The people sympathized in
      their grief, repented of their own fury, and detested the
      indecent joy of Rienzi, who visited the spot where these
      illustrious victims had fallen. It was on that fatal spot that he
      conferred on his son the honor of knighthood: and the ceremony
      was accomplished by a slight blow from each of the horsemen of
      the guard, and by a ridiculous and inhuman ablution from a pool
      of water, which was yet polluted with patrician blood. 46

      43 (return) [ Rienzi, in the above-mentioned letter, ascribes to
      St. Martin the tribune, Boniface VIII. the enemy of Colonna,
      himself, and the Roman people, the glory of the day, which
      Villani likewise (l. 12, c. 104) describes as a regular battle.
      The disorderly skirmish, the flight of the Romans, and the
      cowardice of Rienzi, are painted in the simple and minute
      narrative of Fortifiocca, or the anonymous citizen, (l. i. c.
      34—37.)]

      44 (return) [ In describing the fall of the Colonna, I speak only
      of the family of Stephen the elder, who is often confounded by
      the P. du Cerçeau with his son. That family was extinguished, but
      the house has been perpetuated in the collateral branches, of
      which I have not a very accurate knowledge. Circumspice (says
      Petrarch) familiæ tuæ statum, Columniensium _domos_: solito
      pauciores habeat columnas. Quid ad rem modo fundamentum stabile,
      solidumque permaneat.]

      45 (return) [ The convent of St. Silvester was founded, endowed,
      and protected by the Colonna cardinals, for the daughters of the
      family who embraced a monastic life, and who, in the year 1318,
      were twelve in number. The others were allowed to marry with
      their kinsmen in the fourth degree, and the dispensation was
      justified by the small number and close alliances of the noble
      families of Rome, (Mémoires sur Pétrarque, tom. i. p. 110, tom.
      ii. p. 401.)]

      46 (return) [ Petrarch wrote a stiff and pedantic letter of
      consolation, (Fam. l. vii. epist. 13, p. 682, 683.) The friend
      was lost in the patriot. Nulla toto orbe principum familia
      carior; carior tamen respublica, carior Roma, carior Italia. ——Je
      rends graces aux Dieux de n’être pas Romain.]

      A short delay would have saved the Colonna, the delay of a single
      month, which elapsed between the triumph and the exile of Rienzi.
      In the pride of victory, he forfeited what yet remained of his
      civil virtues, without acquiring the fame of military prowess. A
      free and vigorous opposition was formed in the city; and when the
      tribune proposed in the public council 47 to impose a new tax,
      and to regulate the government of Perugia, thirty-nine members
      voted against his measures; repelled the injurious charge of
      treachery and corruption; and urged him to prove, by their
      forcible exclusion, that if the populace adhered to his cause, it
      was already disclaimed by the most respectable citizens. The pope
      and the sacred college had never been dazzled by his specious
      professions; they were justly offended by the insolence of his
      conduct; a cardinal legate was sent to Italy, and after some
      fruitless treaty, and two personal interviews, he fulminated a
      bull of excommunication, in which the tribune is degraded from
      his office, and branded with the guilt of rebellion, sacrilege,
      and heresy. 48 The surviving barons of Rome were now humbled to a
      sense of allegiance; their interest and revenge engaged them in
      the service of the church; but as the fate of the Colonna was
      before their eyes, they abandoned to a private adventurer the
      peril and glory of the revolution. John Pepin, count of
      Minorbino, 49 in the kingdom of Naples, had been condemned for
      his crimes, or his riches, to perpetual imprisonment; and
      Petrarch, by soliciting his release, indirectly contributed to
      the ruin of his friend. At the head of one hundred and fifty
      soldiers, the count of Minorbino introduced himself into Rome;
      barricaded the quarter of the Colonna: and found the enterprise
      as easy as it had seemed impossible. From the first alarm, the
      bell of the Capitol incessantly tolled; but, instead of repairing
      to the well-known sound, the people were silent and inactive; and
      the pusillanimous Rienzi, deploring their ingratitude with sighs
      and tears, abdicated the government and palace of the republic.

      47 (return) [ This council and opposition is obscurely mentioned
      by Pollistore, a contemporary writer, who has preserved some
      curious and original facts, (Rer. Italicarum, tom. xxv. c. 31, p.
      798—804.)]

      48 (return) [ The briefs and bulls of Clement VI. against Rienzi
      are translated by the P. du Cerçeau, (p. 196, 232,) from the
      Ecclesiastical Annals of Odericus Raynaldus, (A.D. 1347, No. 15,
      17, 21, &c.,) who found them in the archives of the Vatican.]

      49 (return) [ Matteo Villani describes the origin, character, and
      death of this count of Minorbino, a man da natura inconstante e
      senza fede, whose grandfather, a crafty notary, was enriched and
      ennobled by the spoils of the Saracens of Nocera, (l. vii. c.
      102, 103.) See his imprisonment, and the efforts of Petrarch,
      (tom. ii. p. 149—151.)]




      Chapter LXX: Final Settlement Of The Ecclesiastical State.—Part
      III.

      Without drawing his sword, count Pepin restored the aristocracy
      and the church; three senators were chosen, and the legate,
      assuming the first rank, accepted his two colleagues from the
      rival families of Colonna and Ursini. The acts of the tribune
      were abolished, his head was proscribed; yet such was the terror
      of his name, that the barons hesitated three days before they
      would trust themselves in the city, and Rienzi was left above a
      month in the castle of St. Angelo, from whence he peaceably
      withdrew, after laboring, without effect, to revive the affection
      and courage of the Romans. The vision of freedom and empire had
      vanished: their fallen spirit would have acquiesced in servitude,
      had it been smoothed by tranquillity and order; and it was
      scarcely observed, that the new senators derived their authority
      from the Apostolic See; that four cardinals were appointed to
      reform, with dictatorial power, the state of the republic. Rome
      was again agitated by the bloody feuds of the barons, who
      detested each other, and despised the commons: their hostile
      fortresses, both in town and country, again rose, and were again
      demolished: and the peaceful citizens, a flock of sheep, were
      devoured, says the Florentine historian, by these rapacious
      wolves. But when their pride and avarice had exhausted the
      patience of the Romans, a confraternity of the Virgin Mary
      protected or avenged the republic: the bell of the Capitol was
      again tolled, the nobles in arms trembled in the presence of an
      unarmed multitude; and of the two senators, Colonna escaped from
      the window of the palace, and Ursini was stoned at the foot of
      the altar. The dangerous office of tribune was successively
      occupied by two plebeians, Cerroni and Baroncelli. The mildness
      of Cerroni was unequal to the times; and after a faint struggle,
      he retired with a fair reputation and a decent fortune to the
      comforts of rural life. Devoid of eloquence or genius, Baroncelli
      was distinguished by a resolute spirit: he spoke the language of
      a patriot, and trod in the footsteps of tyrants; his suspicion
      was a sentence of death, and his own death was the reward of his
      cruelties. Amidst the public misfortunes, the faults of Rienzi
      were forgotten; and the Romans sighed for the peace and
      prosperity of their good estate. 50

      50 (return) [ The troubles of Rome, from the departure to the
      return of Rienzi, are related by Matteo Villani (l. ii. c. 47, l.
      iii. c. 33, 57, 78) and Thomas Fortifiocca, (l. iii. c. 1—4.) I
      have slightly passed over these secondary characters, who
      imitated the original tribune.]

      After an exile of seven years, the first deliverer was again
      restored to his country. In the disguise of a monk or a pilgrim,
      he escaped from the castle of St. Angelo, implored the friendship
      of the king of Hungary at Naples, tempted the ambition of every
      bold adventurer, mingled at Rome with the pilgrims of the
      jubilee, lay concealed among the hermits of the Apennine, and
      wandered through the cities of Italy, Germany, and Bohemia. His
      person was invisible, his name was yet formidable; and the
      anxiety of the court of Avignon supposes, and even magnifies, his
      personal merit. The emperor Charles the Fourth gave audience to a
      stranger, who frankly revealed himself as the tribune of the
      republic; and astonished an assembly of ambassadors and princes,
      by the eloquence of a patriot and the visions of a prophet, the
      downfall of tyranny and the kingdom of the Holy Ghost. 51
      Whatever had been his hopes, Rienzi found himself a captive; but
      he supported a character of independence and dignity, and obeyed,
      as his own choice, the irresistible summons of the supreme
      pontiff. The zeal of Petrarch, which had been cooled by the
      unworthy conduct, was rekindled by the sufferings and the
      presence, of his friend; and he boldly complains of the times, in
      which the savior of Rome was delivered by her emperor into the
      hands of her bishop. Rienzi was transported slowly, but in safe
      custody, from Prague to Avignon: his entrance into the city was
      that of a malefactor; in his prison he was chained by the leg;
      and four cardinals were named to inquire into the crimes of
      heresy and rebellion. But his trial and condemnation would have
      involved some questions, which it was more prudent to leave under
      the veil of mystery: the temporal supremacy of the popes; the
      duty of residence; the civil and ecclesiastical privileges of the
      clergy and people of Rome. The reigning pontiff well deserved the
      appellation of _Clement_: the strange vicissitudes and
      magnanimous spirit of the captive excited his pity and esteem;
      and Petrarch believes that he respected in the hero the name and
      sacred character of a poet. 52 Rienzi was indulged with an easy
      confinement and the use of books; and in the assiduous study of
      Livy and the Bible, he sought the cause and the consolation of
      his misfortunes.

      51 (return) [ These visions, of which the friends and enemies of
      Rienzi seem alike ignorant, are surely magnified by the zeal of
      Pollistore, a Dominican inquisitor, (Rer. Ital. tom. xxv. c. 36,
      p. 819.) Had the tribune taught, that Christ was succeeded by the
      Holy Ghost, that the tyranny of the pope would be abolished, he
      might have been convicted of heresy and treason, without
      offending the Roman people. * Note: So far from having magnified
      these visions, Pollistore is more than confirmed by the documents
      published by Papencordt. The adoption of all the wild doctrines
      of the Fratricelli, the Spirituals, in which, for the time at
      least, Rienzi appears to have been in earnest; his magnificent
      offers to the emperor, and the whole history of his life, from
      his first escape from Rome to his imprisonment at Avignon, are
      among the most curious chapters of his eventful life.—M. 1845.]

      52 (return) [ The astonishment, the envy almost, of Petrarch is a
      proof, if not of the truth of this incredible fact, at least of
      his own veracity. The abbé de Sade (Mémoires, tom. iii. p. 242)
      quotes the vith epistle of the xiiith book of Petrarch, but it is
      of the royal MS., which he consulted, and not of the ordinary
      Basil edition, (p. 920.)]

      The succeeding pontificate of Innocent the Sixth opened a new
      prospect of his deliverance and restoration; and the court of
      Avignon was persuaded, that the successful rebel could alone
      appease and reform the anarchy of the metropolis. After a solemn
      profession of fidelity, the Roman tribune was sent into Italy,
      with the title of senator; but the death of Baroncelli appeared
      to supersede the use of his mission; and the legate, Cardinal
      Albornoz, 53 a consummate statesman, allowed him with reluctance,
      and without aid, to undertake the perilous experiment. His first
      reception was equal to his wishes: the day of his entrance was a
      public festival; and his eloquence and authority revived the laws
      of the good estate. But this momentary sunshine was soon clouded
      by his own vices and those of the people: in the Capitol, he
      might often regret the prison of Avignon; and after a second
      administration of four months, Rienzi was massacred in a tumult
      which had been fomented by the Roman barons. In the society of
      the Germans and Bohemians, he is said to have contracted the
      habits of intemperance and cruelty: adversity had chilled his
      enthusiasm, without fortifying his reason or virtue; and that
      youthful hope, that lively assurance, which is the pledge of
      success, was now succeeded by the cold impotence of distrust and
      despair. The tribune had reigned with absolute dominion, by the
      choice, and in the hearts, of the Romans: the senator was the
      servile minister of a foreign court; and while he was suspected
      by the people, he was abandoned by the prince. The legate
      Albornoz, who seemed desirous of his ruin, inflexibly refused all
      supplies of men and money; a faithful subject could no longer
      presume to touch the revenues of the apostolical chamber; and the
      first idea of a tax was the signal of clamor and sedition. Even
      his justice was tainted with the guilt or reproach of selfish
      cruelty: the most virtuous citizen of Rome was sacrificed to his
      jealousy; and in the execution of a public robber, from whose
      purse he had been assisted, the magistrate too much forgot, or
      too much remembered, the obligations of the debtor. 54 A civil
      war exhausted his treasures, and the patience of the city: the
      Colonna maintained their hostile station at Palestrina; and his
      mercenaries soon despised a leader whose ignorance and fear were
      envious of all subordinate merit. In the death, as in the life,
      of Rienzi, the hero and the coward were strangely mingled. When
      the Capitol was invested by a furious multitude, when he was
      basely deserted by his civil and military servants, the intrepid
      senator, waving the banner of liberty, presented himself on the
      balcony, addressed his eloquence to the various passions of the
      Romans, and labored to persuade them, that in the same cause
      himself and the republic must either stand or fall. His oration
      was interrupted by a volley of imprecations and stones; and after
      an arrow had transpierced his hand, he sunk into abject despair,
      and fled weeping to the inner chambers, from whence he was let
      down by a sheet before the windows of the prison. Destitute of
      aid or hope, he was besieged till the evening: the doors of the
      Capitol were destroyed with axes and fire; and while the senator
      attempted to escape in a plebeian habit, he was discovered and
      dragged to the platform of the palace, the fatal scene of his
      judgments and executions. A whole hour, without voice or motion,
      he stood amidst the multitude half naked and half dead: their
      rage was hushed into curiosity and wonder: the last feelings of
      reverence and compassion yet struggled in his favor; and they
      might have prevailed, if a bold assassin had not plunged a dagger
      in his breast. He fell senseless with the first stroke: the
      impotent revenge of his enemies inflicted a thousand wounds: and
      the senator’s body was abandoned to the dogs, to the Jews, and to
      the flames. Posterity will compare the virtues and failings of
      this extraordinary man; but in a long period of anarchy and
      servitude, the name of Rienzi has often been celebrated as the
      deliverer of his country, and the last of the Roman patriots. 55

      53 (return) [ Ægidius, or Giles Albornoz, a noble Spaniard,
      archbishop of Toledo, and cardinal legate in Italy, (A.D.
      1353—1367,) restored, by his arms and counsels, the temporal
      dominion of the popes. His life has been separately written by
      Sepulveda; but Dryden could not reasonably suppose, that his
      name, or that of Wolsey, had reached the ears of the Mufti in Don
      Sebastian.]

      54 (return) [ From Matteo Villani and Fortifiocca, the P. du
      Cerçeau (p. 344—394) has extracted the life and death of the
      chevalier Montreal, the life of a robber and the death of a hero.
      At the head of a free company, the first that desolated Italy, he
      became rich and formidable be had money in all the banks,—60,000
      ducats in Padua alone.]

      55 (return) [ The exile, second government, and death of Rienzi,
      are minutely related by the anonymous Roman, who appears neither
      his friend nor his enemy, (l. iii. c. 12—25.) Petrarch, who loved
      the _tribune_, was indifferent to the fate of the _senator_.]

      The first and most generous wish of Petrarch was the restoration
      of a free republic; but after the exile and death of his plebeian
      hero, he turned his eyes from the tribune, to the king, of the
      Romans. The Capitol was yet stained with the blood of Rienzi,
      when Charles the Fourth descended from the Alps to obtain the
      Italian and Imperial crowns. In his passage through Milan he
      received the visit, and repaid the flattery, of the
      poet-laureate; accepted a medal of Augustus; and promised,
      without a smile, to imitate the founder of the Roman monarchy. A
      false application of the name and maxims of antiquity was the
      source of the hopes and disappointments of Petrarch; yet he could
      not overlook the difference of times and characters; the
      immeasurable distance between the first Cæsars and a Bohemian
      prince, who by the favor of the clergy had been elected the
      titular head of the German aristocracy. Instead of restoring to
      Rome her glory and her provinces, he had bound himself by a
      secret treaty with the pope, to evacuate the city on the day of
      his coronation; and his shameful retreat was pursued by the
      reproaches of the patriot bard. 56

      56 (return) [ The hopes and the disappointment of Petrarch are
      agreeably described in his own words by the French biographer,
      (Mémoires, tom. iii. p. 375—413;) but the deep, though secret,
      wound was the coronation of Zanubi, the poet-laureate, by Charles
      IV.]

      After the loss of liberty and empire, his third and more humble
      wish was to reconcile the shepherd with his flock; to recall the
      Roman bishop to his ancient and peculiar diocese. In the fervor
      of youth, with the authority of age, Petrarch addressed his
      exhortations to five successive popes, and his eloquence was
      always inspired by the enthusiasm of sentiment and the freedom of
      language. 57 The son of a citizen of Florence invariably
      preferred the country of his birth to that of his education; and
      Italy, in his eyes, was the queen and garden of the world. Amidst
      her domestic factions, she was doubtless superior to France both
      in art and science, in wealth and politeness; but the difference
      could scarcely support the epithet of barbarous, which he
      promiscuously bestows on the countries beyond the Alps. Avignon,
      the mystic Babylon, the sink of vice and corruption, was the
      object of his hatred and contempt; but he forgets that her
      scandalous vices were not the growth of the soil, and that in
      every residence they would adhere to the power and luxury of the
      papal court. He confesses that the successor of St. Peter is the
      bishop of the universal church; yet it was not on the banks of
      the Rhône, but of the Tyber, that the apostle had fixed his
      everlasting throne; and while every city in the Christian world
      was blessed with a bishop, the metropolis alone was desolate and
      forlorn. Since the removal of the Holy See, the sacred buildings
      of the Lateran and the Vatican, their altars and their saints,
      were left in a state of poverty and decay; and Rome was often
      painted under the image of a disconsolate matron, as if the
      wandering husband could be reclaimed by the homely portrait of
      the age and infirmities of his weeping spouse. 58 But the cloud
      which hung over the seven hills would be dispelled by the
      presence of their lawful sovereign: eternal fame, the prosperity
      of Rome, and the peace of Italy, would be the recompense of the
      pope who should dare to embrace this generous resolution. Of the
      five whom Petrarch exhorted, the three first, John the
      Twenty-second, Benedict the Twelfth, and Clement the Sixth, were
      importuned or amused by the boldness of the orator; but the
      memorable change which had been attempted by Urban the Fifth was
      finally accomplished by Gregory the Eleventh. The execution of
      their design was opposed by weighty and almost insuperable
      obstacles. A king of France, who has deserved the epithet of
      wise, was unwilling to release them from a local dependence: the
      cardinals, for the most part his subjects, were attached to the
      language, manners, and climate of Avignon; to their stately
      palaces; above all, to the wines of Burgundy. In their eyes,
      Italy was foreign or hostile; and they reluctantly embarked at
      Marseilles, as if they had been sold or banished into the land of
      the Saracens. Urban the Fifth resided three years in the Vatican
      with safety and honor: his sanctity was protected by a guard of
      two thousand horse; and the king of Cyprus, the queen of Naples,
      and the emperors of the East and West, devoutly saluted their
      common father in the chair of St. Peter. But the joy of Petrarch
      and the Italians was soon turned into grief and indignation. Some
      reasons of public or private moment, his own impatience or the
      prayers of the cardinals, recalled Urban to France; and the
      approaching election was saved from the tyrannic patriotism of
      the Romans. The powers of heaven were interested in their cause:
      Bridget of Sweden, a saint and pilgrim, disapproved the return,
      and foretold the death, of Urban the Fifth: the migration of
      Gregory the Eleventh was encouraged by St. Catharine of Sienna,
      the spouse of Christ and ambassadress of the Florentines; and the
      popes themselves, the great masters of human credulity, appear to
      have listened to these visionary females. 59 Yet those celestial
      admonitions were supported by some arguments of temporal policy.
      The residents of Avignon had been invaded by hostile violence: at
      the head of thirty thousand robbers, a hero had extorted ransom
      and absolution from the vicar of Christ and the sacred college;
      and the maxim of the French warriors, to spare the people and
      plunder the church, was a new heresy of the most dangerous
      import. 60 While the pope was driven from Avignon, he was
      strenuously invited to Rome. The senate and people acknowledged
      him as their lawful sovereign, and laid at his feet the keys of
      the gates, the bridges, and the fortresses; of the quarter at
      least beyond the Tyber. 61 But this loyal offer was accompanied
      by a declaration, that they could no longer suffer the scandal
      and calamity of his absence; and that his obstinacy would finally
      provoke them to revive and assert the primitive right of
      election. The abbot of Mount Cassin had been consulted, whether
      he would accept the triple crown 62 from the clergy and people:
      “I am a citizen of Rome,” 63 replied that venerable ecclesiastic,
      “and my first law is, the voice of my country.” 64

      57 (return) [ See, in his accurate and amusing biographer, the
      application of Petrarch and Rome to Benedict XII. in the year
      1334, (Mémoires, tom. i. p. 261—265,) to Clement VI. in 1342,
      (tom. ii. p. 45—47,) and to Urban V. in 1366, (tom. iii. p.
      677—691:) his praise (p. 711—715) and excuse (p. 771) of the last
      of these pontiffs. His angry controversy on the respective merits
      of France and Italy may be found, Opp. p. 1068—1085.]

      58 (return) [

               Squalida sed quoniam facies, neglectaque cultû Cæsaries;
               multisque malis lassata senectus Eripuit solitam
               effigiem: vetus accipe nomen; Roma vocor. (Carm. l. 2,
               p. 77.)

      He spins this allegory beyond all measure or patience. The
      Epistles to Urban V in prose are more simple and persuasive,
      (Senilium, l. vii. p. 811—827 l. ix. epist. i. p. 844—854.)]

      59 (return) [ I have not leisure to expatiate on the legends of
      St. Bridget or St. Catharine, the last of which might furnish
      some amusing stories. Their effect on the mind of Gregory XI. is
      attested by the last solemn words of the dying pope, who
      admonished the assistants, ut caverent ab hominibus, sive viris,
      sive mulieribus, sub specie religionis loquentibus visiones sui
      capitis, quia per tales ipse seductus, &c., (Baluz. Not ad Vit.
      Pap. Avenionensium, tom. i. p. 1224.)]

      60 (return) [ This predatory expedition is related by Froissard,
      (Chronique, tom. i. p. 230,) and in the life of Du Guesclin,
      (Collection Générale des Mémoires Historiques, tom. iv. c. 16, p.
      107—113.) As early as the year 1361, the court of Avignon had
      been molested by similar freebooters, who afterwards passed the
      Alps, (Mémoires sur Pétrarque, tom. iii. p. 563—569.)]

      61 (return) [ Fleury alleges, from the annals of Odericus
      Raynaldus, the original treaty which was signed the 21st of
      December, 1376, between Gregory XI. and the Romans, (Hist.
      Ecclés. tom. xx. p. 275.)]

      62 (return) [ The first crown or regnum (Ducange, Gloss. Latin.
      tom. v. p. 702) on the episcopal mitre of the popes, is ascribed
      to the gift of Constantine, or Clovis. The second was added by
      Boniface VIII., as the emblem not only of a spiritual, but of a
      temporal, kingdom. The three states of the church are represented
      by the triple crown which was introduced by John XXII. or
      Benedict XII., (Mémoires sur Pétrarque, tom. i. p. 258, 259.)]

      63 (return) [ Baluze (Not. ad Pap. Avenion. tom. i. p. 1194,
      1195) produces the original evidence which attests the threats of
      the Roman ambassadors, and the resignation of the abbot of Mount
      Cassin, qui, ultro se offerens, respondit se civem Romanum esse,
      et illud velle quod ipsi vellent.]

      64 (return) [ The return of the popes from Avignon to Rome, and
      their reception by the people, are related in the original lives
      of Urban V. and Gregory XI., in Baluze (Vit. Paparum
      Avenionensium, tom. i. p. 363—486) and Muratori, (Script. Rer.
      Italicarum, tom. iii. P. i. p. 613—712.) In the disputes of the
      schism, every circumstance was severely, though partially,
      scrutinized; more especially in the great inquest, which decided
      the obedience of Castile, and to which Baluze, in his notes, so
      often and so largely appeals from a MS. volume in the Harley
      library, (p. 1281, &c.)]

      If superstition will interpret an untimely death, 65 if the merit
      of counsels be judged from the event, the heavens may seem to
      frown on a measure of such apparent season and propriety. Gregory
      the Eleventh did not survive above fourteen months his return to
      the Vatican; and his decease was followed by the great schism of
      the West, which distracted the Latin church above forty years.
      The sacred college was then composed of twenty-two cardinals: six
      of these had remained at Avignon; eleven Frenchmen, one Spaniard,
      and four Italians, entered the conclave in the usual form. Their
      choice was not yet limited to the purple; and their unanimous
      votes acquiesced in the archbishop of Bari, a subject of Naples,
      conspicuous for his zeal and learning, who ascended the throne of
      St. Peter under the name of Urban the Sixth. The epistle of the
      sacred college affirms his free, and regular, election; which had
      been inspired, as usual, by the Holy Ghost; he was adored,
      invested, and crowned, with the customary rites; his temporal
      authority was obeyed at Rome and Avignon, and his ecclesiastical
      supremacy was acknowledged in the Latin world. During several
      weeks, the cardinals attended their new master with the fairest
      professions of attachment and loyalty; till the summer heats
      permitted a decent escape from the city. But as soon as they were
      united at Anagni and Fundi, in a place of security, they cast
      aside the mask, accused their own falsehood and hypocrisy,
      excommunicated the apostate and antichrist of Rome, and proceeded
      to a new election of Robert of Geneva, Clement the Seventh, whom
      they announced to the nations as the true and rightful vicar of
      Christ. Their first choice, an involuntary and illegal act, was
      annulled by fear of death and the menaces of the Romans; and
      their complaint is justified by the strong evidence of
      probability and fact. The twelve French cardinals, above two
      thirds of the votes, were masters of the election; and whatever
      might be their provincial jealousies, it cannot fairly be
      presumed that they would have sacrificed their right and interest
      to a foreign candidate, who would never restore them to their
      native country. In the various, and often inconsistent,
      narratives, 66 the shades of popular violence are more darkly or
      faintly colored: but the licentiousness of the seditious Romans
      was inflamed by a sense of their privileges, and the danger of a
      second emigration. The conclave was intimidated by the shouts,
      and encompassed by the arms, of thirty thousand rebels; the bells
      of the Capitol and St. Peter’s rang an alarm: “Death, or an
      Italian pope!” was the universal cry; the same threat was
      repeated by the twelve bannerets or chiefs of the quarters, in
      the form of charitable advice; some preparations were made for
      burning the obstinate cardinals; and had they chosen a
      Transalpine subject, it is probable that they would never have
      departed alive from the Vatican. The same constraint imposed the
      necessity of dissembling in the eyes of Rome and of the world;
      the pride and cruelty of Urban presented a more inevitable
      danger; and they soon discovered the features of the tyrant, who
      could walk in his garden and recite his breviary, while he heard
      from an adjacent chamber six cardinals groaning on the rack. His
      inflexible zeal, which loudly censured their luxury and vice,
      would have attached them to the stations and duties of their
      parishes at Rome; and had he not fatally delayed a new promotion,
      the French cardinals would have been reduced to a helpless
      minority in the sacred college. For these reasons, and the hope
      of repassing the Alps, they rashly violated the peace and unity
      of the church; and the merits of their double choice are yet
      agitated in the Catholic schools. 67 The vanity, rather than the
      interest, of the nation determined the court and clergy of
      France. 68 The states of Savoy, Sicily, Cyprus, Arragon,
      Castille, Navarre, and Scotland were inclined by their example
      and authority to the obedience of Clement the Seventh, and after
      his decease, of Benedict the Thirteenth. Rome and the principal
      states of Italy, Germany, Portugal, England, 69 the Low
      Countries, and the kingdoms of the North, adhered to the prior
      election of Urban the Sixth, who was succeeded by Boniface the
      Ninth, Innocent the Seventh, and Gregory the Twelfth.

      65 (return) [ Can the death of a good man be esteemed a
      punishment by those who believe in the immortality of the soul?
      They betray the instability of their faith. Yet as a mere
      philosopher, I cannot agree with the Greeks, on oi Jeoi jilousin
      apoqnhskei neoV, (Brunck, Poetæ Gnomici, p. 231.) See in
      Herodotus (l. i. c. 31) the moral and pleasing tale of the Argive
      youths.]

      66 (return) [ In the first book of the Histoire du Concile de
      Pise, M. Lenfant has abridged and compared the original
      narratives of the adherents of Urban and Clement, of the Italians
      and Germans, the French and Spaniards. The latter appear to be
      the most active and loquacious, and every fact and word in the
      original lives of Gregory XI. and Clement VII. are supported in
      the notes of their editor Baluze.]

      67 (return) [ The ordinal numbers of the popes seems to decide
      the question against Clement VII. and Benedict XIII., who are
      boldly stigmatized as antipopes by the Italians, while the French
      are content with authorities and reasons to plead the cause of
      doubt and toleration, (Baluz. in Præfat.) It is singular, or
      rather it is not singular, that saints, visions and miracles
      should be common to both parties.]

      68 (return) [ Baluze strenuously labors (Not. p. 1271—1280) to
      justify the pure and pious motives of Charles V. king of France:
      he refused to hear the arguments of Urban; but were not the
      Urbanists equally deaf to the reasons of Clement, &c.?]

      69 (return) [ An epistle, or declamation, in the name of Edward
      III., (Baluz. Vit. Pap. Avenion. tom. i. p. 553,) displays the
      zeal of the English nation against the Clementines. Nor was their
      zeal confined to words: the bishop of Norwich led a crusade of
      60,000 bigots beyond sea, (Hume’s History, vol. iii. p. 57, 58.)]

      From the banks of the Tyber and the Rhône, the hostile pontiffs
      encountered each other with the pen and the sword: the civil and
      ecclesiastical order of society was disturbed; and the Romans had
      their full share of the mischiefs of which they may be arraigned
      as the primary authors. 70 They had vainly flattered themselves
      with the hope of restoring the seat of the ecclesiastical
      monarchy, and of relieving their poverty with the tributes and
      offerings of the nations; but the separation of France and Spain
      diverted the stream of lucrative devotion; nor could the loss be
      compensated by the two jubilees which were crowded into the space
      of ten years. By the avocations of the schism, by foreign arms,
      and popular tumults, Urban the Sixth and his three successors
      were often compelled to interrupt their residence in the Vatican.
      The Colonna and Ursini still exercised their deadly feuds: the
      bannerets of Rome asserted and abused the privileges of a
      republic: the vicars of Christ, who had levied a military force,
      chastised their rebellion with the gibbet, the sword, and the
      dagger; and, in a friendly conference, eleven deputies of the
      people were perfidiously murdered and cast into the street. Since
      the invasion of Robert the Norman, the Romans had pursued their
      domestic quarrels without the dangerous interposition of a
      stranger. But in the disorders of the schism, an aspiring
      neighbor, Ladislaus king of Naples, alternately supported and
      betrayed the pope and the people; by the former he was declared
      _gonfalonier_, or general, of the church, while the latter
      submitted to his choice the nomination of their magistrates.
      Besieging Rome by land and water, he thrice entered the gates as
      a Barbarian conqueror; profaned the altars, violated the virgins,
      pillaged the merchants, performed his devotions at St. Peter’s,
      and left a garrison in the castle of St. Angelo. His arms were
      sometimes unfortunate, and to a delay of three days he was
      indebted for his life and crown: but Ladislaus triumphed in his
      turn; and it was only his premature death that could save the
      metropolis and the ecclesiastical state from the ambitious
      conqueror, who had assumed the title, or at least the powers, of
      king of Rome. 71

      70 (return) [ Besides the general historians, the Diaries of
      Delphinus Gentilia Peter Antonius, and Stephen Infessura, in the
      great collection of Muratori, represented the state and
      misfortunes of Rome.]

      71 (return) [ It is supposed by Giannone (tom. iii. p. 292) that
      he styled himself Rex Romæ, a title unknown to the world since
      the expulsion of Tarquin. But a nearer inspection has justified
      the reading of Rex R_a_mæ, of Rama, an obscure kingdom annexed to
      the crown of Hungary.]

      I have not undertaken the ecclesiastical history of the schism;
      but Rome, the object of these last chapters, is deeply interested
      in the disputed succession of her sovereigns. The first counsels
      for the peace and union of Christendom arose from the university
      of Paris, from the faculty of the Sorbonne, whose doctors were
      esteemed, at least in the Gallican church, as the most consummate
      masters of theological science. 72 Prudently waiving all
      invidious inquiry into the origin and merits of the dispute, they
      proposed, as a healing measure, that the two pretenders of Rome
      and Avignon should abdicate at the same time, after qualifying
      the cardinals of the adverse factions to join in a legitimate
      election; and that the nations should _subtract_ 73 their
      obedience, if either of the competitor preferred his own interest
      to that of the public. At each vacancy, these physicians of the
      church deprecated the mischiefs of a hasty choice; but the policy
      of the conclave and the ambition of its members were deaf to
      reason and entreaties; and whatsoever promises were made, the
      pope could never be bound by the oaths of the cardinal. During
      fifteen years, the pacific designs of the university were eluded
      by the arts of the rival pontiffs, the scruples or passions of
      their adherents, and the vicissitudes of French factions, that
      ruled the insanity of Charles the Sixth. At length a vigorous
      resolution was embraced; and a solemn embassy, of the titular
      patriarch of Alexandria, two archbishops, five bishops, five
      abbots, three knights, and twenty doctors, was sent to the courts
      of Avignon and Rome, to require, in the name of the church and
      king, the abdication of the two pretenders, of Peter de Luna, who
      styled himself Benedict the Thirteenth, and of Angelo Corrario,
      who assumed the name of Gregory the Twelfth. For the ancient
      honor of Rome, and the success of their commission, the
      ambassadors solicited a conference with the magistrates of the
      city, whom they gratified by a positive declaration, that the
      most Christian king did not entertain a wish of transporting the
      holy see from the Vatican, which he considered as the genuine and
      proper seat of the successor of St. Peter. In the name of the
      senate and people, an eloquent Roman asserted their desire to
      cooperate in the union of the church, deplored the temporal and
      spiritual calamities of the long schism, and requested the
      protection of France against the arms of the king of Naples. The
      answers of Benedict and Gregory were alike edifying and alike
      deceitful; and, in evading the demand of their abdication, the
      two rivals were animated by a common spirit. They agreed on the
      necessity of a previous interview; but the time, the place, and
      the manner, could never be ascertained by mutual consent. “If the
      one advances,” says a servant of Gregory, “the other retreats;
      the one appears an animal fearful of the land, the other a
      creature apprehensive of the water. And thus, for a short remnant
      of life and power, will these aged priests endanger the peace and
      salvation of the Christian world.” 74

      72 (return) [ The leading and decisive part which France assumed
      in the schism is stated by Peter du Puis in a separate history,
      extracted from authentic records, and inserted in the seventh
      volume of the last and best edition of his friend Thuanus, (P.
      xi. p. 110—184.)]

      73 (return) [ Of this measure, John Gerson, a stout doctor, was
      the author of the champion. The proceedings of the university of
      Paris and the Gallican church were often prompted by his advice,
      and are copiously displayed in his theological writings, of which
      Le Clerc (Bibliothèque Choisie, tom. x. p. 1—78) has given a
      valuable extract. John Gerson acted an important part in the
      councils of Pisa and Constance.]

      74 (return) [ Leonardus Brunus Aretinus, one of the revivers of
      classic learning in Italy, who, after serving many years as
      secretary in the Roman court, retired to the honorable office of
      chancellor of the republic of Florence, (Fabric. Bibliot. Medii
      Ævi, tom. i. p. 290.) Lenfant has given the version of this
      curious epistle, (Concile de Pise, tom. i. p. 192—195.)]

      The Christian world was at length provoked by their obstinacy and
      fraud: they were deserted by their cardinals, who embraced each
      other as friends and colleagues; and their revolt was supported
      by a numerous assembly of prelates and ambassadors. With equal
      justice, the council of Pisa deposed the popes of Rome and
      Avignon; the conclave was unanimous in the choice of Alexander
      the Fifth, and his vacant seat was soon filled by a similar
      election of John the Twenty-third, the most profligate of
      mankind. But instead of extinguishing the schism, the rashness of
      the French and Italians had given a third pretender to the chair
      of St. Peter. Such new claims of the synod and conclave were
      disputed; three kings, of Germany, Hungary, and Naples, adhered
      to the cause of Gregory the Twelfth; and Benedict the Thirteenth,
      himself a Spaniard, was acknowledged by the devotion and
      patriotism of that powerful nation. The rash proceedings of Pisa
      were corrected by the council of Constance; the emperor Sigismond
      acted a conspicuous part as the advocate or protector of the
      Catholic church; and the number and weight of civil and
      ecclesiastical members might seem to constitute the
      states-general of Europe. Of the three popes, John the
      Twenty-third was the first victim: he fled and was brought back a
      prisoner: the most scandalous charges were suppressed; the vicar
      of Christ was only accused of piracy, murder, rape, sodomy, and
      incest; and after subscribing his own condemnation, he expiated
      in prison the imprudence of trusting his person to a free city
      beyond the Alps. Gregory the Twelfth, whose obedience was reduced
      to the narrow precincts of Rimini, descended with more honor from
      the throne; and his ambassador convened the session, in which he
      renounced the title and authority of lawful pope. To vanquish the
      obstinacy of Benedict the Thirteenth or his adherents, the
      emperor in person undertook a journey from Constance to
      Perpignan. The kings of Castile, Arragon, Navarre, and Scotland,
      obtained an equal and honorable treaty; with the concurrence of
      the Spaniards, Benedict was deposed by the council; but the
      harmless old man was left in a solitary castle to excommunicate
      twice each day the rebel kingdoms which had deserted his cause.
      After thus eradicating the remains of the schism, the synod of
      Constance proceeded with slow and cautious steps to elect the
      sovereign of Rome and the head of the church. On this momentous
      occasion, the college of twenty-three cardinals was fortified
      with thirty deputies; six of whom were chosen in each of the five
      great nations of Christendom,—the Italian, the German, the
      French, the Spanish, and the _English_: 75 the interference of
      strangers was softened by their generous preference of an Italian
      and a Roman; and the hereditary, as well as personal, merit of
      Otho Colonna recommended him to the conclave. Rome accepted with
      joy and obedience the noblest of her sons; the ecclesiastical
      state was defended by his powerful family; and the elevation of
      Martin the Fifth is the æra of the restoration and establishment
      of the popes in the Vatican. 76

      75 (return) [ I cannot overlook this great national cause, which
      was vigorously maintained by the English ambassadors against
      those of France. The latter contended, that Christendom was
      essentially distributed into the four great nations and votes, of
      Italy, Germany, France, and Spain, and that the lesser kingdoms
      (such as England, Denmark, Portugal, &c.) were comprehended under
      one or other of these great divisions. The English asserted, that
      the British islands, of which they were the head, should be
      considered as a fifth and coördinate nation, with an equal vote;
      and every argument of truth or fable was introduced to exalt the
      dignity of their country. Including England, Scotland, Wales, the
      four kingdoms of Ireland, and the Orkneys, the British Islands
      are decorated with eight royal crowns, and discriminated by four
      or five languages, English, Welsh, Cornish, Scotch, Irish, &c.
      The greater island from north to south measures 800 miles, or 40
      days’ journey; and England alone contains 32 counties and 52,000
      parish churches, (a bold account!) besides cathedrals, colleges,
      priories, and hospitals. They celebrate the mission of St. Joseph
      of Arimathea, the birth of Constantine, and the legatine powers
      of the two primates, without forgetting the testimony of
      Bartholomey de Glanville, (A.D. 1360,) who reckons only four
      Christian kingdoms, 1. of Rome, 2. of Constantinople, 3. of
      Ireland, which had been transferred to the English monarchs, and
      4, of Spain. Our countrymen prevailed in the council, but the
      victories of Henry V. added much weight to their arguments. The
      adverse pleadings were found at Constance by Sir Robert
      Wingfield, ambassador of Henry VIII. to the emperor Maximilian
      I., and by him printed in 1517 at Louvain. From a Leipsic MS.
      they are more correctly published in the collection of Von der
      Hardt, tom. v.; but I have only seen Lenfant’s abstract of these
      acts, (Concile de Constance, tom. ii. p. 447, 453, &c.)]

      76 (return) [ The histories of the three successive councils,
      Pisa, Constance, and Basil, have been written with a tolerable
      degree of candor, industry, and elegance, by a Protestant
      minister, M. Lenfant, who retired from France to Berlin. They
      form six volumes in quarto; and as Basil is the worst, so
      Constance is the best, part of the Collection.]




      Chapter LXX: Final Settlement Of The Ecclesiastical State.—Part
      IV.

      The royal prerogative of coining money, which had been exercised
      near three hundred years by the senate, was _first_ resumed by
      Martin the Fifth, 77 and his image and superscription introduce
      the series of the papal medals. Of his two immediate successors,
      Eugenius the Fourth was the _last_ pope expelled by the tumults
      of the Roman people, 78 and Nicholas the Fifth, the _last_ who
      was importuned by the presence of a Roman emperor. 79 I. The
      conflict of Eugenius with the fathers of Basil, and the weight or
      apprehension of a new excise, emboldened and provoked the Romans
      to usurp the temporal government of the city. They rose in arms,
      elected seven governors of the republic, and a constable of the
      Capitol; imprisoned the pope’s nephew; besieged his person in the
      palace; and shot volleys of arrows into his bark as he escaped
      down the Tyber in the habit of a monk. But he still possessed in
      the castle of St. Angelo a faithful garrison and a train of
      artillery: their batteries incessantly thundered on the city, and
      a bullet more dexterously pointed broke down the barricade of the
      bridge, and scattered with a single shot the heroes of the
      republic. Their constancy was exhausted by a rebellion of five
      months. Under the tyranny of the Ghibeline nobles, the wisest
      patriots regretted the dominion of the church; and their
      repentance was unanimous and effectual. The troops of St. Peter
      again occupied the Capitol; the magistrates departed to their
      homes; the most guilty were executed or exiled; and the legate,
      at the head of two thousand foot and four thousand horse, was
      saluted as the father of the city. The synods of Ferrara and
      Florence, the fear or resentment of Eugenius, prolonged his
      absence: he was received by a submissive people; but the pontiff
      understood from the acclamations of his triumphal entry, that to
      secure their loyalty and his own repose, he must grant without
      delay the abolition of the odious excise. II. Rome was restored,
      adorned, and enlightened, by the peaceful reign of Nicholas the
      Fifth. In the midst of these laudable occupations, the pope was
      alarmed by the approach of Frederic the Third of Austria; though
      his fears could not be justified by the character or the power of
      the Imperial candidate. After drawing his military force to the
      metropolis, and imposing the best security of oaths 80 and
      treaties, Nicholas received with a smiling countenance the
      faithful advocate and vassal of the church. So tame were the
      times, so feeble was the Austrian, that the pomp of his
      coronation was accomplished with order and harmony: but the
      superfluous honor was so disgraceful to an independent nation,
      that his successors have excused themselves from the toilsome
      pilgrimage to the Vatican; and rest their Imperial title on the
      choice of the electors of Germany.

      77 (return) [ See the xxviith Dissertation of the Antiquities of
      Muratori, and the 1st Instruction of the Science des Medailles of
      the Père Joubert and the Baron de la Bastie. The Metallic History
      of Martin V. and his successors has been composed by two monks,
      Moulinet, a Frenchman, and Bonanni, an Italian: but I understand,
      that the first part of the series is restored from more recent
      coins.]

      78 (return) [ Besides the Lives of Eugenius IV., (Rerum Italic.
      tom. iii. P. i. p. 869, and tom. xxv. p. 256,) the Diaries of
      Paul Petroni and Stephen Infessura are the best original evidence
      for the revolt of the Romans against Eugenius IV. The former, who
      lived at the time and on the spot, speaks the language of a
      citizen, equally afraid of priestly and popular tyranny.]

      79 (return) [ The coronation of Frederic III. is described by
      Lenfant, (Concile de Basle, tom. ii. p. 276—288,) from Æneas
      Sylvius, a spectator and actor in that splendid scene.]

      80 (return) [ The oath of fidelity imposed on the emperor by the
      pope is recorded and sanctified in the Clementines, (l. ii. tit.
      ix.;) and Æneas Sylvius, who objects to this new demand, could
      not foresee, that in a few years he should ascend the throne, and
      imbibe the maxims, of Boniface VIII.]

      A citizen has remarked, with pride and pleasure, that the king of
      the Romans, after passing with a slight salute the cardinals and
      prelates who met him at the gate, distinguished the dress and
      person of the senator of Rome; and in this last farewell, the
      pageants of the empire and the republic were clasped in a
      friendly embrace. 81 According to the laws of Rome, 82 her first
      magistrate was required to be a doctor of laws, an alien, of a
      place at least forty miles from the city; with whose inhabitants
      he must not be connected in the third canonical degree of blood
      or alliance. The election was annual: a severe scrutiny was
      instituted into the conduct of the departing senator; nor could
      he be recalled to the same office till after the expiration of
      two years. A liberal salary of three thousand florins was
      assigned for his expense and reward; and his public appearance
      represented the majesty of the republic. His robes were of gold
      brocade or crimson velvet, or in the summer season of a lighter
      silk: he bore in his hand an ivory sceptre; the sound of trumpets
      announced his approach; and his solemn steps were preceded at
      least by four lictors or attendants, whose red wands were
      enveloped with bands or streamers of the golden color or livery
      of the city. His oath in the Capitol proclaims his right and duty
      to observe and assert the laws, to control the proud, to protect
      the poor, and to exercise justice and mercy within the extent of
      his jurisdiction. In these useful functions he was assisted by
      three learned strangers; the two _collaterals_, and the judge of
      criminal appeals: their frequent trials of robberies, rapes, and
      murders, are attested by the laws; and the weakness of these laws
      connives at the licentiousness of private feuds and armed
      associations for mutual defence. But the senator was confined to
      the administration of justice: the Capitol, the treasury, and the
      government of the city and its territory, were intrusted to the
      three _conservators_, who were changed four times in each year:
      the militia of the thirteen regions assembled under the banners
      of their respective chiefs, or _caporioni_; and the first of
      these was distinguished by the name and dignity of the _prior_.
      The popular legislature consisted of the secret and the common
      councils of the Romans. The former was composed of the
      magistrates and their immediate predecessors, with some fiscal
      and legal officers, and three classes of thirteen, twenty-six,
      and forty, counsellors: amounting in the whole to about one
      hundred and twenty persons. In the common council all male
      citizens had a right to vote; and the value of their privilege
      was enhanced by the care with which any foreigners were prevented
      from usurping the title and character of Romans. The tumult of a
      democracy was checked by wise and jealous precautions: except the
      magistrates, none could propose a question; none were permitted
      to speak, except from an open pulpit or tribunal; all disorderly
      acclamations were suppressed; the sense of the majority was
      decided by a secret ballot; and their decrees were promulgated in
      the venerable name of the Roman senate and people. It would not
      be easy to assign a period in which this theory of government has
      been reduced to accurate and constant practice, since the
      establishment of order has been gradually connected with the
      decay of liberty. But in the year one thousand five hundred and
      eighty the ancient statutes were collected, methodized in three
      books, and adapted to present use, under the pontificate, and
      with the approbation, of Gregory the Thirteenth: 83 this civil
      and criminal code is the modern law of the city; and, if the
      popular assemblies have been abolished, a foreign senator, with
      the three conservators, still resides in the palace of the
      Capitol. 84 The policy of the Cæsars has been repeated by the
      popes; and the bishop of Rome affected to maintain the form of a
      republic, while he reigned with the absolute powers of a
      temporal, as well as a spiritual, monarch.

      81 (return) [ Lo senatore di Roma, vestito di brocarto con quella
      beretta, e con quelle maniche, et ornamenti di pelle, co’ quali
      va alle feste di Testaccio e Nagone, might escape the eye of
      Æneas Sylvius, but he is viewed with admiration and complacency
      by the Roman citizen, (Diario di Stephano Infessura, p. 1133.)]

      82 (return) [ See, in the statutes of Rome, the _senator and
      three judges_, (l. i. c. 3—14,) the _conservators_, (l. i. c. 15,
      16, 17, l. iii. c. 4,) the _caporioni_ (l. i. c. 18, l. iii. c.
      8,) the _secret council_, (l. iii. c. 2,) the _common council_,
      (l. iii. c. 3.) The title of _feuds_, _defiances_, _acts of
      violence_, &c., is spread through many a chapter (c. 14—40) of
      the second book.]

      83 (return) [ _Statuta alm Urbis Rom Auctoritate S. D. N.
      Gregorii XIII Pont. Max. a Senatu Populoque Rom. reformata et
      edita. Rom, 1580, in folio_. The obsolete, repugnant statutes of
      antiquity were confounded in five books, and Lucas Pætus, a
      lawyer and antiquarian, was appointed to act as the modern
      Tribonian. Yet I regret the old code, with the rugged crust of
      freedom and barbarism.]

      84 (return) [ In my time (1765) and in M. Grosley’s,
      (Observations sur l’Italie torn. ii. p. 361,) the senator of Rome
      was M. Bielke, a noble Swede and a proselyte to the Catholic
      faith. The pope’s right to appoint the senator and the
      conservator is implied, rather than affirmed, in the statutes.]

      It is an obvious truth, that the times must be suited to
      extraordinary characters, and that the genius of Cromwell or Retz
      might now expire in obscurity. The political enthusiasm of Rienzi
      had exalted him to a throne; the same enthusiasm, in the next
      century, conducted his imitator to the gallows. The birth of
      Stephen Porcaro was noble, his reputation spotless: his tongue
      was armed with eloquence, his mind was enlightened with learning;
      and he aspired, beyond the aim of vulgar ambition, to free his
      country and immortalize his name. The dominion of priests is most
      odious to a liberal spirit: every scruple was removed by the
      recent knowledge of the fable and forgery of Constantine’s
      donation; Petrarch was now the oracle of the Italians; and as
      often as Porcaro revolved the ode which describes the patriot and
      hero of Rome, he applied to himself the visions of the prophetic
      bard. His first trial of the popular feelings was at the funeral
      of Eugenius the Fourth: in an elaborate speech he called the
      Romans to liberty and arms; and they listened with apparent
      pleasure, till Porcaro was interrupted and answered by a grave
      advocate, who pleaded for the church and state. By every law the
      seditious orator was guilty of treason; but the benevolence of
      the new pontiff, who viewed his character with pity and esteem,
      attempted by an honorable office to convert the patriot into a
      friend. The inflexible Roman returned from Anagni with an
      increase of reputation and zeal; and, on the first opportunity,
      the games of the place Navona, he tried to inflame the casual
      dispute of some boys and mechanics into a general rising of the
      people. Yet the humane Nicholas was still averse to accept the
      forfeit of his life; and the traitor was removed from the scene
      of temptation to Bologna, with a liberal allowance for his
      support, and the easy obligation of presenting himself each day
      before the governor of the city. But Porcaro had learned from the
      younger Brutus, that with tyrants no faith or gratitude should be
      observed: the exile declaimed against the arbitrary sentence; a
      party and a conspiracy were gradually formed: his nephew, a
      daring youth, assembled a band of volunteers; and on the
      appointed evening a feast was prepared at his house for the
      friends of the republic. Their leader, who had escaped from
      Bologna, appeared among them in a robe of purple and gold: his
      voice, his countenance, his gestures, bespoke the man who had
      devoted his life or death to the glorious cause. In a studied
      oration, he expiated on the motives and the means of their
      enterprise; the name and liberties of Rome; the sloth and pride
      of their ecclesiastical tyrants; the active or passive consent of
      their fellow-citizens; three hundred soldiers, and four hundred
      exiles, long exercised in arms or in wrongs; the license of
      revenge to edge their swords, and a million of ducats to reward
      their victory. It would be easy, (he said,) on the next day, the
      festival of the Epiphany, to seize the pope and his cardinals,
      before the doors, or at the altar, of St. Peter’s; to lead them
      in chains under the walls of St. Angelo; to extort by the threat
      of their instant death a surrender of the castle; to ascend the
      vacant Capitol; to ring the alarm bell; and to restore in a
      popular assembly the ancient republic of Rome. While he
      triumphed, he was already betrayed. The senator, with a strong
      guard, invested the house: the nephew of Porcaro cut his way
      through the crowd; but the unfortunate Stephen was drawn from a
      chest, lamenting that his enemies had anticipated by three hours
      the execution of his design. After such manifest and repeated
      guilt, even the mercy of Nicholas was silent. Porcaro, and nine
      of his accomplices, were hanged without the benefit of the
      sacraments; and, amidst the fears and invectives of the papal
      court, the Romans pitied, and almost applauded, these martyrs of
      their country. 85 But their applause was mute, their pity
      ineffectual, their liberty forever extinct; and, if they have
      since risen in a vacancy of the throne or a scarcity of bread,
      such accidental tumults may be found in the bosom of the most
      abject servitude.

      85 (return) [ Besides the curious, though concise, narrative of
      Machiavel, (Istoria Florentina, l. vi. Opere, tom. i. p. 210,
      211, edit. Londra, 1747, in 4to.) the Porcarian conspiracy is
      related in the Diary of Stephen Infessura, (Rer. Ital. tom. iii.
      P. ii. p. 1134, 1135,) and in a separate tract by Leo Baptista
      Alberti, (Rer. Ital. tom. xxv. p. 609—614.) It is amusing to
      compare the style and sentiments of the courtier and citizen.
      Facinus profecto quo.... neque periculo horribilius, neque
      audaciâ detestabilius, neque crudelitate tetrius, a quoquam
      perditissimo uspiam excogitatum sit.... Perdette la vita quell’
      huomo da bene, e amatore dello bene e libertà di Roma.]

      But the independence of the nobles, which was fomented by
      discord, survived the freedom of the commons, which must be
      founded in union. A privilege of rapine and oppression was long
      maintained by the barons of Rome; their houses were a fortress
      and a sanctuary: and the ferocious train of banditti and
      criminals whom they protected from the law repaid the hospitality
      with the service of their swords and daggers. The private
      interest of the pontiffs, or their nephews, sometimes involved
      them in these domestic feuds. Under the reign of Sixtus the
      Fourth, Rome was distracted by the battles and sieges of the
      rival houses: after the conflagration of his palace, the
      prothonotary Colonna was tortured and beheaded; and Savelli, his
      captive friend, was murdered on the spot, for refusing to join in
      the acclamations of the victorious Ursini. 86 But the popes no
      longer trembled in the Vatican: they had strength to command, if
      they had resolution to claim, the obedience of their subjects;
      and the strangers, who observed these partial disorders, admired
      the easy taxes and wise administration of the ecclesiastical
      state. 87

      86 (return) [ The disorders of Rome, which were much inflamed by
      the partiality of Sixtus IV. are exposed in the Diaries of two
      spectators, Stephen Infessura, and an anonymous citizen. See the
      troubles of the year 1484, and the death of the prothonotary
      Colonna, in tom. iii. P. ii. p. 1083, 1158.]

      87 (return) [ Est toute la terre de l’église troublée pour cette
      partialité (des Colonnes et des Ursins) come nous dirions Luce et
      Grammont, ou en Hollande Houc et Caballan; et quand ce ne seroit
      ce différend la terre de l’église seroit la plus heureuse
      habitation pour les sujets qui soit dans toute le monde (car ils
      ne payent ni tailles ni guères autres choses,) et seroient
      toujours bien conduits, (car toujours les papes sont sages et
      bien consellies;) mais très souvent en advient de grands et
      cruels meurtres et pilleries.]

      The spiritual thunders of the Vatican depend on the force of
      opinion; and if that opinion be supplanted by reason or passion,
      the sound may idly waste itself in the air; and the helpless
      priest is exposed to the brutal violence of a noble or a plebeian
      adversary. But after their return from Avignon, the keys of St.
      Peter were guarded by the sword of St. Paul. Rome was commanded
      by an impregnable citadel: the use of cannon is a powerful engine
      against popular seditions: a regular force of cavalry and
      infantry was enlisted under the banners of the pope: his ample
      revenues supplied the resources of war: and, from the extent of
      his domain, he could bring down on a rebellious city an army of
      hostile neighbors and loyal subjects. 88 Since the union of the
      duchies of Ferrara and Urbino, the ecclesiastical state extends
      from the Mediterranean to the Adriatic, and from the confines of
      Naples to the banks of the Po; and as early as the sixteenth
      century, the greater part of that spacious and fruitful country
      acknowledged the lawful claims and temporal sovereignty of the
      Roman pontiffs. Their claims were readily deduced from the
      genuine, or fabulous, donations of the darker ages: the
      successive steps of their final settlement would engage us too
      far in the transactions of Italy, and even of Europe; the crimes
      of Alexander the Sixth, the martial operations of Julius the
      Second, and the liberal policy of Leo the Tenth, a theme which
      has been adorned by the pens of the noblest historians of the
      times. 89 In the first period of their conquests, till the
      expedition of Charles the Eighth, the popes might successfully
      wrestle with the adjacent princes and states, whose military
      force was equal, or inferior, to their own. But as soon as the
      monarchs of France, Germany and Spain, contended with gigantic
      arms for the dominion of Italy, they supplied with art the
      deficiency of strength; and concealed, in a labyrinth of wars and
      treaties, their aspiring views, and the immortal hope of chasing
      the Barbarians beyond the Alps. The nice balance of the Vatican
      was often subverted by the soldiers of the North and West, who
      were united under the standard of Charles the Fifth: the feeble
      and fluctuating policy of Clement the Seventh exposed his person
      and dominions to the conqueror; and Rome was abandoned seven
      months to a lawless army, more cruel and rapacious than the Goths
      and Vandals. 90 After this severe lesson, the popes contracted
      their ambition, which was almost satisfied, resumed the character
      of a common parent, and abstained from all offensive hostilities,
      except in a hasty quarrel, when the vicar of Christ and the
      Turkish sultan were armed at the same time against the kingdom of
      Naples. 91 The French and Germans at length withdrew from the
      field of battle: Milan, Naples, Sicily, Sardinia, and the
      sea-coast of Tuscany, were firmly possessed by the Spaniards; and
      it became their interest to maintain the peace and dependence of
      Italy, which continued almost without disturbance from the middle
      of the sixteenth to the opening of the eighteenth century. The
      Vatican was swayed and protected by the religious policy of the
      Catholic king: his prejudice and interest disposed him in every
      dispute to support the prince against the people; and instead of
      the encouragement, the aid, and the asylum, which they obtained
      from the adjacent states, the friends of liberty, or the enemies
      of law, were enclosed on all sides within the iron circle of
      despotism. The long habits of obedience and education subdued the
      turbulent spirit of the nobles and commons of Rome. The barons
      forgot the arms and factions of their ancestors, and insensibly
      became the servants of luxury and government. Instead of
      maintaining a crowd of tenants and followers, the produce of
      their estates was consumed in the private expenses which multiply
      the pleasures, and diminish the power, of the lord. 92 The
      Colonna and Ursini vied with each other in the decoration of
      their palaces and chapels; and their antique splendor was
      rivalled or surpassed by the sudden opulence of the papal
      families. In Rome the voice of freedom and discord is no longer
      heard; and, instead of the foaming torrent, a smooth and stagnant
      lake reflects the image of idleness and servitude.

      88 (return) [ By the conomy of Sixtus V. the revenue of the
      ecclesiastical state was raised to two millions and a half of
      Roman crowns, (Vita, tom. ii. p. 291—296;) and so regular was the
      military establishment, that in one month Clement VIII. could
      invade the duchy of Ferrara with three thousand horse and twenty
      thousand foot, (tom. iii. p. 64) Since that time (A.D. 1597) the
      papal arms are happily rusted: but the revenue must have gained
      some nominal increase. * Note: On the financial measures of
      Sixtus V. see Ranke, Dio Römischen Päpste, i. p. 459.—M.]

      89 (return) [ More especially by Guicciardini and Machiavel; in
      the general history of the former, in the Florentine history, the
      Prince, and the political discourses of the latter. These, with
      their worthy successors, Fra Paolo and Davila, were justly
      esteemed the first historians of modern languages, till, in the
      present age, Scotland arose, to dispute the prize with Italy
      herself.]

      90 (return) [ In the history of the Gothic siege, I have compared
      the Barbarians with the subjects of Charles V., (vol. iii. p.
      289, 290;) an anticipation, which, like that of the Tartar
      conquests, I indulged with the less scruple, as I could scarcely
      hope to reach the conclusion of my work.]

      91 (return) [ The ambitious and feeble hostilities of the Caraffa
      pope, Paul IV. may be seen in Thuanus (l. xvi.—xviii.) and
      Giannone, (tom. iv p. 149—163.) Those Catholic bigots, Philip II.
      and the duke of Alva, presumed to separate the Roman prince from
      the vicar of Christ, yet the holy character, which would have
      sanctified his victory was decently applied to protect his
      defeat. * Note: But compare Ranke, Die Römischen Päpste, i. p.
      289.—M.]

      92 (return) [ This gradual change of manners and expense is
      admirably explained by Dr. Adam Smith, (Wealth of Nations, vol.
      i. p. 495—504,) who proves, perhaps too severely, that the most
      salutary effects have flowed from the meanest and most selfish
      causes.]

      A Christian, a philosopher, 93 and a patriot, will be equally
      scandalized by the temporal kingdom of the clergy; and the local
      majesty of Rome, the remembrance of her consuls and triumphs, may
      seem to imbitter the sense, and aggravate the shame, of her
      slavery. If we calmly weigh the merits and defects of the
      ecclesiastical government, it may be praised in its present
      state, as a mild, decent, and tranquil system, exempt from the
      dangers of a minority, the sallies of youth, the expenses of
      luxury, and the calamities of war. But these advantages are
      overbalanced by a frequent, perhaps a septennial, election of a
      sovereign, who is seldom a native of the country; the reign of a
      _young_ statesman of threescore, in the decline of his life and
      abilities, without hope to accomplish, and without children to
      inherit, the labors of his transitory reign. The successful
      candidate is drawn from the church, and even the convent; from
      the mode of education and life the most adverse to reason,
      humanity, and freedom. In the trammels of servile faith, he has
      learned to believe because it is absurd, to revere all that is
      contemptible, and to despise whatever might deserve the esteem of
      a rational being; to punish error as a crime, to reward
      mortification and celibacy as the first of virtues; to place the
      saints of the calendar 94 above the heroes of Rome and the sages
      of Athens; and to consider the missal, or the crucifix, as more
      useful instruments than the plough or the loom. In the office of
      nuncio, or the rank of cardinal, he may acquire some knowledge of
      the world, but the primitive stain will adhere to his mind and
      manners: from study and experience he may suspect the mystery of
      his profession; but the sacerdotal artist will imbibe some
      portion of the bigotry which he inculcates. The genius of Sixtus
      the Fifth 95 burst from the gloom of a Franciscan cloister. In a
      reign of five years, he exterminated the outlaws and banditti,
      abolished the _profane_ sanctuaries of Rome, 96 formed a naval
      and military force, restored and emulated the monuments of
      antiquity, and after a liberal use and large increase of the
      revenue, left five millions of crowns in the castle of St.
      Angelo. But his justice was sullied with cruelty, his activity
      was prompted by the ambition of conquest: after his decease the
      abuses revived; the treasure was dissipated; he entailed on
      posterity thirty-five new taxes and the venality of offices; and,
      after his death, his statue was demolished by an ungrateful, or
      an injured, people. 97 The wild and original character of Sixtus
      the Fifth stands alone in the series of the pontiffs; the maxims
      and effects of their temporal government may be collected from
      the positive and comparative view of the arts and philosophy, the
      agriculture and trade, the wealth and population, of the
      ecclesiastical state. For myself, it is my wish to depart in
      charity with all mankind, nor am I willing, in these last
      moments, to offend even the pope and clergy of Rome. 98

      93 (return) [ Mr. Hume (Hist. of England, vol. i. p. 389) too
      hastily conclude that if the civil and ecclesiastical powers be
      united in the same person, it is of little moment whether he be
      styled prince or prelate since the temporal character will always
      predominate.]

      94 (return) [ A Protestant may disdain the unworthy preference of
      St. Francis or St. Dominic, but he will not rashly condemn the
      zeal or judgment of Sixtus V., who placed the statues of the
      apostles St. Peter and St. Paul on the vacant columns of Trajan
      and Antonine.]

      95 (return) [ A wandering Italian, Gregorio Leti, has given the
      Vita di Sisto-Quinto, (Amstel. 1721, 3 vols. in 12mo.,) a copious
      and amusing work, but which does not command our absolute
      confidence. Yet the character of the man, and the principal
      facts, are supported by the annals of Spondanus and Muratori,
      (A.D. 1585—1590,) and the contemporary history of the great
      Thuanus, (l. lxxxii. c. 1, 2, l. lxxxiv. c. 10, l. c. c. 8.) *
      Note: The industry of M. Ranke has discovered the document, a
      kind of scandalous chronicle of the time, from which Leti wrought
      up his amusing romances. See also M. Ranke’s observations on the
      Life of Sixtus. by Tempesti, b. iii. p. 317, 324.— M.]

      96 (return) [ These privileged places, the _quartieri_ or
      _franchises_, were adopted from the Roman nobles by the foreign
      ministers. Julius II. had once abolished the abominandum et
      detestandum franchitiarum hujusmodi nomen: and after Sixtus V.
      they again revived. I cannot discern either the justice or
      magnanimity of Louis XIV., who, in 1687, sent his ambassador, the
      marquis de Lavardin, to Rome, with an armed force of a thousand
      officers, guards, and domestics, to maintain this iniquitous
      claim, and insult Pope Innocent XI. in the heart of his capital,
      (Vita di Sisto V. tom. iii. p. 260—278. Muratori, Annali
      d’Italia, tom. xv. p. 494—496, and Voltaire, Siecle de Louis XIV.
      tom. i. c. 14, p. 58, 59.)]

      97 (return) [ This outrage produced a decree, which was inscribed
      on marble, and placed in the Capitol. It is expressed in a style
      of manly simplicity and freedom: Si quis, sive privatus, sive
      magistratum gerens de collocandâ _vivo_ pontifici statuâ
      mentionem facere ausit, legitimo S. P. Q. R. decreto in perpetuum
      infamis et publicorum munerum expers esto. MDXC. mense Augusto,
      (Vita di Sisto V. tom. iii. p. 469.) I believe that this decree
      is still observed, and I know that every monarch who deserves a
      statue should himself impose the prohibition.]

      98 (return) [ The histories of the church, Italy, and
      Christendom, have contributed to the chapter which I now
      conclude. In the original Lives of the Popes, we often discover
      the city and republic of Rome: and the events of the xivth and
      xvth centuries are preserved in the rude and domestic chronicles
      which I have carefully inspected, and shall recapitulate in the
      order of time.

      1. Monaldeschi (Ludovici Boncomitis) Fragmenta Annalium Roman.
      A.D. 1328, in the Scriptores Rerum Italicarum of Muratori, tom.
      xii. p. 525. N. B. The credit of this fragment is somewhat hurt
      by a singular interpolation, in which the author relates his own
      death at the age of 115 years.

      2. Fragmenta Historiæ Romanæ (vulgo Thomas Fortifioccæ) in Romana
      Dialecto vulgari, (A.D. 1327—1354, in Muratori, Antiquitat. Medii
      Ævi Italiæ, tom. iii. p. 247—548;) the authentic groundwork of
      the history of Rienzi.

      3. Delphini (Gentilis) Diarium Romanum, (A.D. 1370—1410,) in the
      Rerum Italicarum, tom. iii. P. ii. p. 846.

      4. Antonii (Petri) Diarium Rom., (A.D. 1404—1417,) tom. xxiv. p.
      699.

      5. Petroni (Pauli) Miscellanea Historica Romana, (A.D.
      1433—1446,) tom. xxiv. p. 1101.

      6. Volaterrani (Jacob.) Diarium Rom., (A.D. 1472—1484,) tom.
      xxiii p. 81.

      7. Anonymi Diarium Urbis Romæ, (A.D. 1481—1492,) tom. iii. P. ii.
      p. 1069.

      8. Infessuræ (Stephani) Diarium Romanum, (A.D. 1294, or
      1378—1494,) tom. iii. P. ii. p. 1109.

      9. Historia Arcana Alexandri VI. sive Excerpta ex Diario Joh.
      Burcardi, (A.D. 1492—1503,) edita a Godefr. Gulielm. Leibnizio,
      Hanover, 697, in 14to. The large and valuable Journal of Burcard
      might be completed from the MSS. in different libraries of Italy
      and France, (M. de Foncemagne, in the Mémoires de l’Acad. des
      Inscrip. tom. xvii. p. 597—606.)

      Except the last, all these fragments and diaries are inserted in
      the Collections of Muratori, my guide and master in the history
      of Italy. His country, and the public, are indebted to him for
      the following works on that subject: 1. _Rerum Italicarum
      Scriptores_, (A.D. 500—1500,) _quorum potissima pars nunc primum
      in lucem prodit_, &c., xxviii. vols. in folio, Milan, 1723—1738,
      1751. A volume of chronological and alphabetical tables is still
      wanting as a key to this great work, which is yet in a disorderly
      and defective state. 2. _Antiquitates Italiæ Medii Ævi_, vi.
      vols. in folio, Milan, 1738—1743, in lxxv. curious dissertations,
      on the manners, government, religion, &c., of the Italians of the
      darker ages, with a large supplement of charters, chronicles, &c.
      3. _Dissertazioni sopra le Antiquita Italiane_, iii. vols. in
      4to., Milano, 1751, a free version by the author, which may be
      quoted with the same confidence as the Latin text of the
      Antiquities. _Annali d’ Italia_, xviii. vols. in octavo, Milan,
      1753—1756, a dry, though accurate and useful, abridgment of the
      history of Italy, from the birth of Christ to the middle of the
      xviiith century. 5. _Dell’ Antichita Estense ed Italiane_, ii.
      vols. in folio, Modena, 1717, 1740. In the history of this
      illustrious race, the parent of our Brunswick kings, the critic
      is not seduced by the loyalty or gratitude of the subject. In all
      his works, Muratori approves himself a diligent and laborious
      writer, who aspires above the prejudices of a Catholic priest. He
      was born in the year 1672, and died in the year 1750, after
      passing near 60 years in the libraries of Milan and Modena, (Vita
      del Proposto Ludovico Antonio Muratori, by his nephew and
      successor Gian. Francesco Soli Muratori Venezia, 1756 m 4to.)]




      